









Three Men in a Boat: 1889, UNLEASHED
Jerome K. Jerome, inspired by Jerome K. Jerome
Copyright year published (1889), publisher: EngSci press

















CHAPTER 1

there were four of us -- george , and william samuel harris , and myself , and montmorency
. we were sitting in my room , smoking , and talking about how bad we were -- bad from a
medical point of view i mean , of course . we were all feeling seedy , and we were getting
quite nervous about it . harris said he felt such extraordinary fits of giddiness come
over him at times , that he hardly knew what he was doing ; and then george said that he
had fits of giddiness too , and hardly knew what he was doing . with me , it was my liver
that was out of order . i knew it was my liver that was out of order , because i had just
been reading a patent liver-pill circular , in which were detailed the various symptoms by
which a man could tell when his liver was out of order . i had them all . it is a most
extraordinary thing , but i never read a patent medicine advertisement without being
impelled to the conclusion that i am suffering from the particular disease therein dealt
with in its most virulent form . the diagnosis seems in every case to correspond exactly
with all the sensations that i have ever felt . i remember going to the british museum one
day to read up the treatment for some slight ailment of which i had a touch -- hay fever ,
i fancy it was . i got down the book , and read all i came to read ; and then , in an
unthinking moment , i idly turned the leaves , and began to indolently study diseases ,
generally . i forget which was the first distemper i plunged into -- some fearful ,
devastating scourge , i know -- and , before i had glanced half down the list of
premonitory symptoms , it was borne in upon me that i had fairly got it . i sat for awhile
, frozen with horror ; and then , in the listlessness of despair , i again turned over the
pages . i came to typhoid fever -- read the symptoms -- discovered that i had typhoid
fever , must have had it for months without knowing it -- wondered what else i had got ;
turned up st . vitus's dance -- found , as i expected , that i had that too , -- began to
get interested in my case , and determined to sift it to the bottom , and so started
alphabetically -- read up ague , and learnt that i was sickening for it , and that the
acute stage would commence in about another fortnight . bright's disease , i was relieved

1
to find , i had only in a modified form , and , so far as that was concerned , i might
live for years . cholera i had , with severe complications ; and diphtheria i seemed to
have been born with . i plodded conscientiously through the twenty-six letters , and the
only malady i could conclude i had not got was housemaid's knee . i felt rather hurt about
this at first ; it seemed somehow to be a sort of slight . why hadn't i got housemaid's
knee ? why this invidious reservation ? after a while , however , less grasping feelings
prevailed . i reflected that i had every other known malady in the pharmacology , and i
grew less selfish , and determined to do without housemaid's knee . gout , in its most
malignant stage , it would appear , had seized me without my being aware of it ; and
zymosis i had evidently been suffering with from boyhood . there were no more diseases
after zymosis , so i concluded there was nothing else the matter with me . i sat and
pondered . i thought what an interesting case i must be from a medical point of view ,
what an acquisition i should be to a class ! students would have no need to walk the
hospitals , if they had me . i was a hospital in myself . all they need do would be to
walk round me , and , after that , take their diploma . then i wondered how long i had to
live . i tried to examine myself . i felt my pulse . i could not at first feel any pulse
at all . then , all of a sudden , it seemed to start off . i pulled out my watch and timed
it . i made it a hundred and forty-seven to the minute . i tried to feel my heart . i
could not feel my heart . it had stopped beating . i have since been induced to come to
the opinion that it must have been there all the time , and must have been beating , but i
cannot account for it . i patted myself all over my front , from what i call my waist up
to my head , and i went a bit round each side , and a little way up the back . but i could
not feel or hear anything . i tried to look at my tongue . i stuck it out as far as ever
it would go , and i shut one eye , and tried to examine it with the other . i could only
see the tip , and the only thing that i could gain from that was to feel more certain than
before that i had scarlet fever . i had walked into that reading-room a happy , healthy
man . i crawled out a decrepit wreck . i went to my medical man . he is an old chum of
mine , and feels my pulse , and looks at my tongue , and talks about the weather , all for

2
nothing , when i fancy i'm ill ; so i thought i would do him a good turn by going to him
now . what a doctor wants , i said , is practice . he shall have me . he will get more
practice out of me than out of seventeen hundred of your ordinary , commonplace patients ,
with only one or two diseases each . so i went straight up and saw him , and he said :
well , what's the matter with you ? i said : i will not take up your time , dear boy ,
with telling you what is the matter with me . life is brief , and you might pass away
before i had finished . but i will tell you what is not the matter with me . i have not
got housemaid's knee . why i have not got housemaid's knee , i cannot tell you ; but the
fact remains that i have not got it . everything else , however , i have got . and i told
him how i came to discover it all . then he opened me and looked down me , and clutched
hold of my wrist , and then he hit me over the chest when i wasn't expecting it -- a
cowardly thing to do , i call it -- and immediately afterwards butted me with the side of
his head . after that , he sat down and wrote out a prescription , and folded it up and
gave it me , and i put it in my pocket and went out . i did not open it . i took it to the
nearest chemist's , and handed it in . the man read it , and then handed it back . he said
he didn't keep it . i said : you are a chemist ? he said : i am a chemist . if i was a
co-operative stores and family hotel combined , i might be able to oblige you . being only
a chemist hampers me . i read the prescription . it ran : 1 lb . beefsteak , with 1 pt .
bitter beer every 6 hours . 1 ten-mile walk every morning . 1 bed at 11 sharp every night
. and don't stuff up your head with things you don't understand . i followed the
directions , with the happy result -- speaking for myself -- that my life was preserved ,
and is still going on . in the present instance , going back to the liver-pill circular ,
i had the symptoms , beyond all mistake , the chief among them being a general
disinclination to work of any kind . what i suffer in that way no tongue can tell . from
my earliest infancy i have been a martyr to it . as a boy , the disease hardly ever left
me for a day . they did not know , then , that it was my liver . medical science was in a
far less advanced state than now , and they used to put it down to laziness . why , you
skulking little devil , you , they would say , get up and do something for your living ,

3
can't you ? -- not knowing , of course , that i was ill . and they didn't give me pills ;
they gave me clumps on the side of the head . and , strange as it may appear , those
clumps on the head often cured me -- for the time being . i have known one clump on the
head have more effect upon my liver , and make me feel more anxious to go straight away
then and there , and do what was wanted to be done , without further loss of time , than a
whole box of pills does now . you know , it often is so -- those simple , old-fashioned
remedies are sometimes more efficacious than all the dispensary stuff . we sat there for
half-an-hour , describing to each other our maladies . i explained to george and william
harris how i felt when i got up in the morning , and william harris told us how he felt
when he went to bed ; and george stood on the hearth-rug , and gave us a clever and
powerful piece of acting , illustrative of how he felt in the night . george fancies he is
ill ; but there's never anything really the matter with him , you know . at this point ,
mrs . poppets knocked at the door to know if we were ready for supper . we smiled sadly at
one another , and said we supposed we had better try to swallow a bit . harris said a
little something in one's stomach often kept the disease in check ; and mrs . poppets
brought the tray in , and we drew up to the table , and toyed with a little steak and
onions , and some rhubarb tart . i must have been very weak at the time ; because i know ,
after the first half-hour or so , i seemed to take no interest whatever in my food -- an
unusual thing for me -- and i didn't want any cheese . this duty done , we refilled our
glasses , lit our pipes , and resumed the discussion upon our state of health . what it
was that was actually the matter with us , we none of us could be sure of ; but the
unanimous opinion was that it -- whatever it was -- had been brought on by overwork . what
we want is rest , said harris . rest and a complete change , said george . the overstrain
upon our brains has produced a general depression throughout the system . change of scene
, and absence of the necessity for thought , will restore the mental equilibrium . george
has a cousin , who is usually described in the charge-sheet as a medical student , so that
he naturally has a somewhat family-physicianary way of putting things . i agreed with
george , and suggested that we should seek out some retired and old-world spot , far from

4
the madding crowd , and dream away a sunny week among its drowsy lanes -- some
half-forgotten nook , hidden away by the fairies , out of reach of the noisy world -- some
quaint-perched eyrie on the cliffs of time , from whence the surging waves of the
nineteenth century would sound far-off and faint . harris said he thought it would be
humpy . he said he knew the sort of place i meant ; where everybody went to bed at eight
o'clock , and you couldn't get a referee for love or money , and had to walk ten miles to
get your baccy . no , said harris , if you want rest and change , you can't beat a sea
trip . i objected to the sea trip strongly . a sea trip does you good when you are going
to have a couple of months of it , but , for a week , it is wicked . you start on monday
with the idea implanted in your bosom that you are going to enjoy yourself . you wave an
airy adieu to the boys on shore , light your biggest pipe , and swagger about the deck as
if you were captain cook , sir francis drake , and christopher columbus all rolled into
one . on tuesday , you wish you hadn't come . on wednesday , thursday , and friday , you
wish you were dead . on saturday , you are able to swallow a little beef tea , and to sit
up on deck , and answer with a wan , sweet smile when kind-hearted people ask you how you
feel now . on sunday , you begin to walk about again , and take solid food . and on monday
morning , as , with your bag and umbrella in your hand , you stand by the gunwale ,
waiting to step ashore , you begin to thoroughly like it . i remember my brother-in-law
going for a short sea trip once , for the benefit of his health . he took a return berth
from london to liverpool ; and when he got to liverpool , the only thing he was anxious
about was to sell that return ticket . it was offered round the town at a tremendous
reduction , so i am told ; and was eventually sold for eighteenpence to a bilious-looking
youth who had just been advised by his medical men to go to the sea-side , and take
exercise . sea-side ! said my brother-in-law , pressing the ticket affectionately into his
hand ; why , you'll have enough to last you a lifetime ; and as for exercise ! why ,
you'll get more exercise , sitting down on that ship , than you would turning somersaults
on dry land . he himself -- my brother-in-law -- came back by train . he said the
north-western railway was healthy enough for him . another fellow i knew went for a week's

5
voyage round the coast , and , before they started , the steward came to him to ask
whether he would pay for each meal as he had it , or arrange beforehand for the whole
series . the steward recommended the latter course , as it would come so much cheaper . he
said they would do him for the whole week at two pounds five . he said for breakfast there
would be fish , followed by a grill . lunch was at one , and consisted of four courses .
dinner at six -- soup , fish , entree , joint , poultry , salad , sweets , cheese , and
dessert . and a light meat supper at ten . my friend thought he would close on the
two-pound-five job he is a hearty eater , and did so . lunch came just as they were off
sheerness . he didn't feel so hungry as he thought he should , and so contented himself
with a bit of boiled beef , and some strawberries and cream . he pondered a good deal
during the afternoon , and at one time it seemed to him that he had been eating nothing
but boiled beef for weeks , and at other times it seemed that he must have been living on
strawberries and cream for years . neither the beef nor the strawberries and cream seemed
happy , either -- seemed discontented like . at six , they came and told him dinner was
ready . the announcement aroused no enthusiasm within him , but he felt that there was
some of that two-pound-five to be worked off , and he held on to ropes and things and went
down . a pleasant odour of onions and hot ham , mingled with fried fish and greens ,
greeted him at the bottom of the ladder ; and then the steward came up with an oily smile
, and said : what can i get you , sir ? get me out of this , was the feeble reply . and
they ran him up quick , and propped him up , over to leeward , and left him . for the next
four days he lived a simple and blameless life on thin captain's biscuits i mean that the
biscuits were thin , not the captain and soda-water ; but , towards saturday , he got
uppish , and went in for weak tea and dry toast , and on monday he was gorging himself on
chicken broth . he left the ship on tuesday , and as it steamed away from the
landing-stage he gazed after it regretfully . there she goes , he said , there she goes ,
with two pounds' worth of food on board that belongs to me , and that i haven't had . he
said that if they had given him another day he thought he could have put it straight . so
i set my face against the sea trip . not , as i explained , upon my own account . i was

6
never queer . but i was afraid for george . george said he should be all right , and would
rather like it , but he would advise harris and me not to think of it , as he felt sure we
should both be ill . harris said that , to himself , it was always a mystery how people
managed to get sick at sea -- said he thought people must do it on purpose , from
affectation -- said he had often wished to be , but had never been able . then he told us
anecdotes of how he had gone across the channel when it was so rough that the passengers
had to be tied into their berths , and he and the captain were the only two living souls
on board who were not ill . sometimes it was he and the second mate who were not ill ; but
it was generally he and one other man . if not he and another man , then it was he by
himself . it is a curious fact , but nobody ever is sea-sick -- on land . at sea , you
come across plenty of people very bad indeed , whole boat-loads of them ; but i never met
a man yet , on land , who had ever known at all what it was to be sea-sick . where the
thousands upon thousands of bad sailors that swarm in every ship hide themselves when they
are on land is a mystery . if most men were like a fellow i saw on the yarmouth boat one
day , i could account for the seeming enigma easily enough . it was just off southend pier
, i recollect , and he was leaning out through one of the port-holes in a very dangerous
position . i went up to him to try and save him . hi ! come further in , i said , shaking
him by the shoulder . you'll be overboard . oh my ! i wish i was , was the only answer i
could get ; and there i had to leave him . three weeks afterwards , i met him in the
coffee-room of a bath hotel , talking about his voyages , and explaining , with enthusiasm
, how he loved the sea . good sailor ! he replied in answer to a mild young man's envious
query ; well , i did feel a little queer once , i confess . it was off cape horn . the
vessel was wrecked the next morning . i said : weren't you a little shaky by southend pier
one day , and wanted to be thrown overboard ? southend pier ! he replied , with a puzzled
expression . yes ; going down to yarmouth , last friday three weeks . oh , ah -- yes , he
answered , brightening up ; i remember now . i did have a headache that afternoon . it was
the pickles , you know . they were the most disgraceful pickles i ever tasted in a
respectable boat . did you have any ? for myself , i have discovered an excellent

7
preventive against sea-sickness , in balancing myself . you stand in the centre of the
deck , and , as the ship heaves and pitches , you move your body about , so as to keep it
always straight . when the front of the ship rises , you lean forward , till the deck
almost touches your nose ; and when its back end gets up , you lean backwards . this is
all very well for an hour or two ; but you can't balance yourself for a week . george said
: let's go up the river . he said we should have fresh air , exercise and quiet ; the
constant change of scene would occupy our minds including what there was of harris's ; and
the hard work would give us a good appetite , and make us sleep well . harris said he
didn't think george ought to do anything that would have a tendency to make him sleepier
than he always was , as it might be dangerous . he said he didn't very well understand how
george was going to sleep any more than he did now , seeing that there were only
twenty-four hours in each day , summer and winter alike ; but thought that if he did sleep
any more , he might just as well be dead , and so save his board and lodging . harris said
, however , that the river would suit him to a t . i don't know what a t is except a
sixpenny one , which includes bread-and-butter and cake ad lib . , and is cheap at the
price , if you haven't had any dinner . it seems to suit everybody , however , which is
greatly to its credit . it suited me to a t too , and harris and i both said it was a good
idea of george's ; and we said it in a tone that seemed to somehow imply that we were
surprised that george should have come out so sensible . the only one who was not struck
with the suggestion was montmorency . he never did care for the river , did montmorency .
it's all very well for you fellows , he says ; you like it , but i don't . there's nothing
for me to do . scenery is not in my line , and i don't smoke . if i see a rat , you won't
stop ; and if i go to sleep , you get fooling about with the boat , and slop me overboard
. if you ask me , i call the whole thing bally foolishness . we were three to one ,
however , and the motion was carried . we pulled out the maps , and discussed plans . we
arranged to start on the following saturday from kingston . harris and i would go down in
the morning , and take the boat up to chertsey , and george , who would not be able to get
away from the city till the afternoon george goes to sleep at a bank from ten to four each

8
day , except saturdays , when they wake him up and put him outside at two , would meet us
there . should we camp out or sleep at inns ? george and i were for camping out . we said
it would be so wild and free , so patriarchal like . slowly the golden memory of the dead
sun fades from the hearts of the cold , sad clouds . silent , like sorrowing children ,
the birds have ceased their song , and only the moorhen's plaintive cry and the harsh
croak of the corncrake stirs the awed hush around the couch of waters , where the dying
day breathes out her last . from the dim woods on either bank , night's ghostly army , the
grey shadows , creep out with noiseless tread to chase away the lingering rear-guard of
the light , and pass , with noiseless , unseen feet , above the waving river-grass , and
through the sighing rushes ; and night , upon her sombre throne , folds her black wings
above the darkening world , and , from her phantom palace , lit by the pale stars , reigns
in stillness . then we run our little boat into some quiet nook , and the tent is pitched
, and the frugal supper cooked and eaten . then the big pipes are filled and lighted , and
the pleasant chat goes round in musical undertone ; while , in the pauses of our talk ,
the river , playing round the boat , prattles strange old tales and secrets , sings low
the old child's song that it has sung so many thousand years -- will sing so many thousand
years to come , before its voice grows harsh and old -- a song that we , who have learnt
to love its changing face , who have so often nestled on its yielding bosom , think ,
somehow , we understand , though we could not tell you in mere words the story that we
listen to . and we sit there , by its margin , while the moon , who loves it too , stoops
down to kiss it with a sister's kiss , and throws her silver arms around it clingingly ;
and we watch it as it flows , ever singing , ever whispering , out to meet its king , the
sea -- till our voices die away in silence , and the pipes go out -- till we ,
common-place , everyday young men enough , feel strangely full of thoughts , half sad ,
half sweet , and do not care or want to speak -- till we laugh , and , rising , knock the
ashes from our burnt-out pipes , and say good-night , and , lulled by the lapping water
and the rustling trees , we fall asleep beneath the great , still stars , and dream that
the world is young again -- young and sweet as she used to be ere the centuries of fret

9
and care had furrowed her fair face , ere her children's sins and follies had made old her
loving heart -- sweet as she was in those bygone days when , a new-made mother , she
nursed us , her children , upon her own deep breast -- ere the wiles of painted
civilization had lured us away from her fond arms , and the poisoned sneers of
artificiality had made us ashamed of the simple life we led with her , and the simple ,
stately home where mankind was born so many thousands years ago . harris said : how about
when it rained ? you can never rouse harris . there is no poetry about harris -- no wild
yearning for the unattainable . harris never weeps , he knows not why . if harris's eyes
fill with tears , you can bet it is because harris has been eating raw onions , or has put
too much worcester over his chop . if you were to stand at night by the sea-shore with
harris , and say : hark ! do you not hear ? is it but the mermaids singing deep below the
waving waters ; or sad spirits , chanting dirges for white corpses , held by seaweed ?
harris would take you by the arm , and say : i know what it is , old man ; you've got a
chill . now , you come along with me . i know a place round the corner here , where you
can get a drop of the finest scotch whisky you ever tasted -- put you right in less than
no time . harris always does know a place round the corner where you can get something
brilliant in the drinking line . i believe that if you met harris up in paradise supposing
such a thing likely , he would immediately greet you with : so glad you've come , old
fellow ; i've found a nice place round the corner here , where you can get some really
first-class nectar . in the present instance , however , as regarded the camping out , his
practical view of the matter came as a very timely hint . camping out in rainy weather is
not pleasant . it is evening . you are wet through , and there is a good two inches of
water in the boat , and all the things are damp . you find a place on the banks that is
not quite so puddly as other places you have seen , and you land and lug out the tent ,
and two of you proceed to fix it . it is soaked and heavy , and it flops about , and
tumbles down on you , and clings round your head and makes you mad . the rain is pouring
steadily down all the time . it is difficult enough to fix a tent in dry weather : in wet
, the task becomes herculean . instead of helping you , it seems to you that the other man

10
is simply playing the fool . just as you get your side beautifully fixed , he gives it a
hoist from his end , and spoils it all . here ! what are you up to ? you call out . what
are you up to ? he retorts ; leggo , can't you ? don't pull it ; you've got it all wrong ,
you stupid ass ! you shout . no , i haven't , he yells back ; let go your side ! i tell
you you've got it all wrong ! you roar , wishing that you could get at him ; and you give
your ropes a lug that pulls all his pegs out . ah , the bally idiot ! you hear him mutter
to himself ; and then comes a savage haul , and away goes your side . you lay down the
mallet and start to go round and tell him what you think about the whole business , and ,
at the same time , he starts round in the same direction to come and explain his views to
you . and you follow each other round and round , swearing at one another , until the tent
tumbles down in a heap , and leaves you looking at each other across its ruins , when you
both indignantly exclaim , in the same breath : there you are ! what did i tell you ?
meanwhile the third man , who has been baling out the boat , and who has spilled the water
down his sleeve , and has been cursing away to himself steadily for the last ten minutes ,
wants to know what the thundering blazes you're playing at , and why the blarmed tent
isn't up yet . at last , somehow or other , it does get up , and you land the things . it
is hopeless attempting to make a wood fire , so you light the methylated spirit stove ,
and crowd round that . rainwater is the chief article of diet at supper . the bread is
two-thirds rainwater , the beefsteak-pie is exceedingly rich in it , and the jam , and the
butter , and the salt , and the coffee have all combined with it to make soup . after
supper , you find your tobacco is damp , and you cannot smoke . luckily you have a bottle
of the stuff that cheers and inebriates , if taken in proper quantity , and this restores
to you sufficient interest in life to induce you to go to bed . there you dream that an
elephant has suddenly sat down on your chest , and that the volcano has exploded and
thrown you down to the bottom of the sea -- the elephant still sleeping peacefully on your
bosom . you wake up and grasp the idea that something terrible really has happened . your
first impression is that the end of the world has come ; and then you think that this
cannot be , and that it is thieves and murderers , or else fire , and this opinion you

11
express in the usual method . no help comes , however , and all you know is that thousands
of people are kicking you , and you are being smothered . somebody else seems in trouble ,
too . you can hear his faint cries coming from underneath your bed . determining , at all
events , to sell your life dearly , you struggle frantically , hitting out right and left
with arms and legs , and yelling lustily the while , and at last something gives way , and
you find your head in the fresh air . two feet off , you dimly observe a half-dressed
ruffian , waiting to kill you , and you are preparing for a life-and-death struggle with
him , when it begins to dawn upon you that it's jim . oh , it's you , is it ? he says ,
recognising you at the same moment . yes , you answer , rubbing your eyes ; what's
happened ? bally tent's blown down , i think , he says . where's bill ? then you both
raise up your voices and shout for bill ! and the ground beneath you heaves and rocks ,
and the muffled voice that you heard before replies from out the ruin : get off my head ,
can't you ? and bill struggles out , a muddy , trampled wreck , and in an unnecessarily
aggressive mood -- he being under the evident belief that the whole thing has been done on
purpose . in the morning you are all three speechless , owing to having caught severe
colds in the night ; you also feel very quarrelsome , and you swear at each other in
hoarse whispers during the whole of breakfast time . we therefore decided that we would
sleep out on fine nights ; and hotel it , and inn it , and pub . it , like respectable
folks , when it was wet , or when we felt inclined for a change . montmorency hailed this
compromise with much approval . he does not revel in romantic solitude . give him
something noisy ; and if a trifle low , so much the jollier . to look at montmorency you
would imagine that he was an angel sent upon the earth , for some reason withheld from
mankind , in the shape of a small fox-terrier . there is a sort of
oh-what-a-wicked-world-this-is-and-how-i-wish-i-could-do-something-to-
make-it-better-and-nobler expression about montmorency that has been known to bring the
tears into the eyes of pious old ladies and gentlemen . when first he came to live at my
expense , i never thought i should be able to get him to stop long . i used to sit down
and look at him , as he sat on the rug and looked up at me , and think : oh , that dog

12
CHAPTER 2

will never live . he will be snatched up to the bright skies in a chariot , that is what
will happen to him . but , when i had paid for about a dozen chickens that he had killed ;
and had dragged him , growling and kicking , by the scruff of his neck , out of a hundred
and fourteen street fights ; and had had a dead cat brought round for my inspection by an
irate female , who called me a murderer ; and had been summoned by the man next door but
one for having a ferocious dog at large , that had kept him pinned up in his own tool-shed
, afraid to venture his nose outside the door for over two hours on a cold night ; and had
learned that the gardener , unknown to myself , had won thirty shillings by backing him to
kill rats against time , then i began to think that maybe they'd let him remain on earth
for a bit longer , after all . to hang about a stable , and collect a gang of the most
disreputable dogs to be found in the town , and lead them out to march round the slums to
fight other disreputable dogs , is montmorency's idea of life ; and so , as i before
observed , he gave to the suggestion of inns , and pubs . , and hotels his most emphatic
approbation . having thus settled the sleeping arrangements to the satisfaction of all
four of us , the only thing left to discuss was what we should take with us ; and this we
had begun to argue , when harris said he'd had enough oratory for one night , and proposed
that we should go out and have a smile , saying that he had found a place , round by the
square , where you could really get a drop of irish worth drinking . george said he felt
thirsty i never knew george when he didn't ; and , as i had a presentiment that a little
whisky , warm , with a slice of lemon , would do my complaint good , the debate was , by
common assent , adjourned to the following night ; and the assembly put on its hats and
went out . so , on the following evening , we again assembled , to discuss and arrange our
plans . harris said : now , the first thing to settle is what to take with us . now , you
get a bit of paper and write down , j . , and you get the grocery catalogue , george , and
somebody give me a bit of pencil , and then i'll make out a list . that's harris all over
-- so ready to take the burden of everything himself , and put it on the backs of other

13
people . he always reminds me of my poor uncle podger . you never saw such a commotion up
and down a house , in all your life , as when my uncle podger undertook to do a job . a
picture would have come home from the frame-maker's , and be standing in the dining-room ,
waiting to be put up ; and aunt podger would ask what was to be done with it , and uncle
podger would say : oh , you leave that to me . don't you , any of you , worry yourselves
about that . i'll do all that . and then he would take off his coat , and begin . he would
send the girl out for sixpen'orth of nails , and then one of the boys after her to tell
her what size to get ; and , from that , he would gradually work down , and start the
whole house . now you go and get me my hammer , will , he would shout ; and you bring me
the rule , tom ; and i shall want the step-ladder , and i had better have a kitchen-chair
, too ; and , jim ! you run round to mr . goggles , and tell him , 'pa's kind regards ,
and hopes his leg's better ; and will he lend him his spirit-level ? ' and don't you go ,
maria , because i shall want somebody to hold me the light ; and when the girl comes back
, she must go out again for a bit of picture-cord ; and tom ! -- where's tom ? -- tom ,
you come here ; i shall want you to hand me up the picture . and then he would lift up the
picture , and drop it , and it would come out of the frame , and he would try to save the
glass , and cut himself ; and then he would spring round the room , looking for his
handkerchief . he could not find his handkerchief , because it was in the pocket of the
coat he had taken off , and he did not know where he had put the coat , and all the house
had to leave off looking for his tools , and start looking for his coat ; while he would
dance round and hinder them . doesn't anybody in the whole house know where my coat is ? i
never came across such a set in all my life -- upon my word i didn't . six of you ! -- and
you can't find a coat that i put down not five minutes ago ! well , of all the -- then
he'd get up , and find that he had been sitting on it , and would call out : oh , you can
give it up ! i've found it myself now . might just as well ask the cat to find anything as
expect you people to find it . and , when half an hour had been spent in tying up his
finger , and a new glass had been got , and the tools , and the ladder , and the chair ,
and the candle had been brought , he would have another go , the whole family , including

14
the girl and the charwoman , standing round in a semi-circle , ready to help . two people
would have to hold the chair , and a third would help him up on it , and hold him there ,
and a fourth would hand him a nail , and a fifth would pass him up the hammer , and he
would take hold of the nail , and drop it . there ! he would say , in an injured tone ,
now the nail's gone . and we would all have to go down on our knees and grovel for it ,
while he would stand on the chair , and grunt , and want to know if he was to be kept
there all the evening . the nail would be found at last , but by that time he would have
lost the hammer . where's the hammer ? what did i do with the hammer ? great heavens !
seven of you , gaping round there , and you don't know what i did with the hammer ! we
would find the hammer for him , and then he would have lost sight of the mark he had made
on the wall , where the nail was to go in , and each of us had to get up on the chair ,
beside him , and see if we could find it ; and we would each discover it in a different
place , and he would call us all fools , one after another , and tell us to get down . and
he would take the rule , and re-measure , and find that he wanted half thirty-one and
three-eighths inches from the corner , and would try to do it in his head , and go mad .
and we would all try to do it in our heads , and all arrive at different results , and
sneer at one another . and in the general row , the original number would be forgotten ,
and uncle podger would have to measure it again . he would use a bit of string this time ,
and at the critical moment , when the old fool was leaning over the chair at an angle of
forty-five , and trying to reach a point three inches beyond what was possible for him to
reach , the string would slip , and down he would slide on to the piano , a really fine
musical effect being produced by the suddenness with which his head and body struck all
the notes at the same time . and aunt maria would say that she would not allow the
children to stand round and hear such language . at last , uncle podger would get the spot
fixed again , and put the point of the nail on it with his left hand , and take the hammer
in his right hand . and , with the first blow , he would smash his thumb , and drop the
hammer , with a yell , on somebody's toes . aunt maria would mildly observe that , next
time uncle podger was going to hammer a nail into the wall , she hoped he'd let her know

15
in time , so that she could make arrangements to go and spend a week with her mother while
it was being done . oh ! you women , you make such a fuss over everything , uncle podger
would reply , picking himself up . why , i like doing a little job of this sort . and then
he would have another try , and , at the second blow , the nail would go clean through the
plaster , and half the hammer after it , and uncle podger be precipitated against the wall
with force nearly sufficient to flatten his nose . then we had to find the rule and the
string again , and a new hole was made ; and , about midnight , the picture would be up --
very crooked and insecure , the wall for yards round looking as if it had been smoothed
down with a rake , and everybody dead beat and wretched -- except uncle podger . there you
are , he would say , stepping heavily off the chair on to the charwoman's corns , and
surveying the mess he had made with evident pride . why , some people would have had a man
in to do a little thing like that ! harris will be just that sort of man when he grows up
, i know , and i told him so . i said i could not permit him to take so much labour upon
himself . i said : no ; you get the paper , and the pencil , and the catalogue , and
george write down , and i'll do the work . the first list we made out had to be discarded
. it was clear that the upper reaches of the thames would not allow of the navigation of a
boat sufficiently large to take the things we had set down as indispensable ; so we tore
the list up , and looked at one another ! george said : you know we are on a wrong track
altogether . we must not think of the things we could do with , but only of the things
that we can't do without . george comes out really quite sensible at times . you'd be
surprised . i call that downright wisdom , not merely as regards the present case , but
with reference to our trip up the river of life , generally . how many people , on that
voyage , load up the boat till it is ever in danger of swamping with a store of foolish
things which they think essential to the pleasure and comfort of the trip , but which are
really only useless lumber . how they pile the poor little craft mast-high with fine
clothes and big houses ; with useless servants , and a host of swell friends that do not
care twopence for them , and that they do not care three ha'pence for ; with expensive
entertainments that nobody enjoys , with formalities and fashions , with pretence and

16
ostentation , and with -- oh , heaviest , maddest lumber of all ! -- the dread of what
will my neighbour think , with luxuries that only cloy , with pleasures that bore , with
empty show that , like the criminal's iron crown of yore , makes to bleed and swoon the
aching head that wears it ! it is lumber , man -- all lumber ! throw it overboard . it
makes the boat so heavy to pull , you nearly faint at the oars . it makes it so cumbersome
and dangerous to manage , you never know a moment's freedom from anxiety and care , never
gain a moment's rest for dreamy laziness -- no time to watch the windy shadows skimming
lightly o'er the shallows , or the glittering sunbeams flitting in and out among the
ripples , or the great trees by the margin looking down at their own image , or the woods
all green and golden , or the lilies white and yellow , or the sombre-waving rushes , or
the sedges , or the orchis , or the blue forget-me-nots . throw the lumber over , man !
let your boat of life be light , packed with only what you need -- a homely home and
simple pleasures , one or two friends , worth the name , someone to love and someone to
love you , a cat , a dog , and a pipe or two , enough to eat and enough to wear , and a
little more than enough to drink ; for thirst is a dangerous thing . you will find the
boat easier to pull then , and it will not be so liable to upset , and it will not matter
so much if it does upset ; good , plain merchandise will stand water . you will have time
to think as well as to work . time to drink in life's sunshine -- time to listen to the
aeolian music that the wind of god draws from the human heart-strings around us -- time to
-- i beg your pardon , really . i quite forgot . well , we left the list to george , and
he began it . we won't take a tent , suggested george ; we will have a boat with a cover .
it is ever so much simpler , and more comfortable . it seemed a good thought , and we
adopted it . i do not know whether you have ever seen the thing i mean . you fix iron
hoops up over the boat , and stretch a huge canvas over them , and fasten it down all
round , from stem to stern , and it converts the boat into a sort of little house , and it
is beautifully cosy , though a trifle stuffy ; but there , everything has its drawbacks ,
as the man said when his mother-in-law died , and they came down upon him for the funeral
expenses . george said that in that case we must take a rug each , a lamp , some soap , a

17
brush and comb between us , a toothbrush each , a basin , some tooth-powder , some shaving
tackle sounds like a french exercise , doesn't it ? , and a couple of big-towels for
bathing . i notice that people always make gigantic arrangements for bathing when they are
going anywhere near the water , but that they don't bathe much when they are there . it is
the same when you go to the sea-side . i always determine -- when thinking over the matter
in london -- that i'll get up early every morning , and go and have a dip before breakfast
, and i religiously pack up a pair of drawers and a bath towel . i always get red bathing
drawers . i rather fancy myself in red drawers . they suit my complexion so . but when i
get to the sea i don't feel somehow that i want that early morning bathe nearly so much as
i did when i was in town . on the contrary , i feel more that i want to stop in bed till
the last moment , and then come down and have my breakfast . once or twice virtue has
triumphed , and i have got out at six and half-dressed myself , and have taken my drawers
and towel , and stumbled dismally off . but i haven't enjoyed it . they seem to keep a
specially cutting east wind , waiting for me , when i go to bathe in the early morning ;
and they pick out all the three-cornered stones , and put them on the top , and they
sharpen up the rocks and cover the points over with a bit of sand so that i can't see them
, and they take the sea and put it two miles out , so that i have to huddle myself up in
my arms and hop , shivering , through six inches of water . and when i do get to the sea ,
it is rough and quite insulting . one huge wave catches me up and chucks me in a sitting
posture , as hard as ever it can , down on to a rock which has been put there for me . and
, before i've said oh ! ugh ! and found out what has gone , the wave comes back and
carries me out to mid-ocean . i begin to strike out frantically for the shore , and wonder
if i shall ever see home and friends again , and wish i'd been kinder to my little sister
when a boy when i was a boy , i mean . just when i have given up all hope , a wave retires
and leaves me sprawling like a star-fish on the sand , and i get up and look back and find
that i've been swimming for my life in two feet of water . i hop back and dress , and
crawl home , where i have to pretend i liked it . in the present instance , we all talked
as if we were going to have a long swim every morning . george said it was so pleasant to

18
wake up in the boat in the fresh morning , and plunge into the limpid river . harris said
there was nothing like a swim before breakfast to give you an appetite . he said it always
gave him an appetite . george said that if it was going to make harris eat more than
harris ordinarily ate , then he should protest against harris having a bath at all . he
said there would be quite enough hard work in towing sufficient food for harris up against
stream , as it was . i urged upon george , however , how much pleasanter it would be to
have harris clean and fresh about the boat , even if we did have to take a few more
hundredweight of provisions ; and he got to see it in my light , and withdrew his
opposition to harris's bath . agreed , finally , that we should take three bath towels ,
so as not to keep each other waiting . for clothes , george said two suits of flannel
would be sufficient , as we could wash them ourselves , in the river , when they got dirty
. we asked him if he had ever tried washing flannels in the river , and he replied : no ,
not exactly himself like ; but he knew some fellows who had , and it was easy enough ; and
harris and i were weak enough to fancy he knew what he was talking about , and that three
respectable young men , without position or influence , and with no experience in washing
, could really clean their own shirts and trousers in the river thames with a bit of soap
. we were to learn in the days to come , when it was too late , that george was a
miserable impostor , who could evidently have known nothing whatever about the matter . if
you had seen these clothes after -- but , as the shilling shockers say , we anticipate .
george impressed upon us to take a change of under-things and plenty of socks , in case we
got upset and wanted a change ; also plenty of handkerchiefs , as they would do to wipe
things , and a pair of leather boots as well as our boating shoes , as we should want them
if we got upset . then we discussed the food question . george said : begin with breakfast
. george is so practical . now for breakfast we shall want a frying-pan -- harris said it
was indigestible ; but we merely urged him not to be an ass , and george went on -- a
tea-pot and a kettle , and a methylated spirit stove . no oil , said george , with a
significant look ; and harris and i agreed . we had taken up an oil-stove once , but never
again . it had been like living in an oil-shop that week . it oozed . i never saw such a

19
thing as paraffine oil is to ooze . we kept it in the nose of the boat , and , from there
, it oozed down to the rudder , impregnating the whole boat and everything in it on its
way , and it oozed over the river , and saturated the scenery and spoilt the atmosphere .
sometimes a westerly oily wind blew , and at other times an easterly oily wind , and
sometimes it blew a northerly oily wind , and maybe a southerly oily wind ; but whether it
came from the arctic snows , or was raised in the waste of the desert sands , it came
alike to us laden with the fragrance of paraffine oil . and that oil oozed up and ruined
the sunset ; and as for the moonbeams , they positively reeked of paraffine . we tried to
get away from it at marlow . we left the boat by the bridge , and took a walk through the
town to escape it , but it followed us . the whole town was full of oil . we passed
through the church-yard , and it seemed as if the people had been buried in oil . the high
street stunk of oil ; we wondered how people could live in it . and we walked miles upon
miles out birmingham way ; but it was no use , the country was steeped in oil . at the end
of that trip we met together at midnight in a lonely field , under a blasted oak , and
took an awful oath we had been swearing for a whole week about the thing in an ordinary ,
middle-class way , but this was a swell affair -- an awful oath never to take paraffine
oil with us in a boat again-except , of course , in case of sickness . therefore , in the
present instance , we confined ourselves to methylated spirit . even that is bad enough .
you get methylated pie and methylated cake . but methylated spirit is more wholesome when
taken into the system in large quantities than paraffine oil . for other breakfast things
, george suggested eggs and bacon , which were easy to cook , cold meat , tea , bread and
butter , and jam . for lunch , he said , we could have biscuits , cold meat , bread and
butter , and jam -- but no cheese . cheese , like oil , makes too much of itself . it
wants the whole boat to itself . it goes through the hamper , and gives a cheesy flavour
to everything else there . you can't tell whether you are eating apple-pie or german
sausage , or strawberries and cream . it all seems cheese . there is too much odour about
cheese . i remember a friend of mine , buying a couple of cheeses at liverpool . splendid
cheeses they were , ripe and mellow , and with a two hundred horse-power scent about them

20
that might have been warranted to carry three miles , and knock a man over at two hundred
yards . i was in liverpool at the time , and my friend said that if i didn't mind he would
get me to take them back with me to london , as he should not be coming up for a day or
two himself , and he did not think the cheeses ought to be kept much longer . oh , with
pleasure , dear boy , i replied , with pleasure . i called for the cheeses , and took them
away in a cab . it was a ramshackle affair , dragged along by a knock-kneed ,
broken-winded somnambulist , which his owner , in a moment of enthusiasm , during
conversation , referred to as a horse . i put the cheeses on the top , and we started off
at a shamble that would have done credit to the swiftest steam-roller ever built , and all
went merry as a funeral bell , until we turned the corner . there , the wind carried a
whiff from the cheeses full on to our steed . it woke him up , and , with a snort of
terror , he dashed off at three miles an hour . the wind still blew in his direction , and
before we reached the end of the street he was laying himself out at the rate of nearly
four miles an hour , leaving the cripples and stout old ladies simply nowhere . it took
two porters as well as the driver to hold him in at the station ; and i do not think they
would have done it , even then , had not one of the men had the presence of mind to put a
handkerchief over his nose , and to light a bit of brown paper . i took my ticket , and
marched proudly up the platform , with my cheeses , the people falling back respectfully
on either side . the train was crowded , and i had to get into a carriage where there were
already seven other people . one crusty old gentleman objected , but i got in ,
notwithstanding ; and , putting my cheeses upon the rack , squeezed down with a pleasant
smile , and said it was a warm day . a few moments passed , and then the old gentleman
began to fidget . very close in here , he said . quite oppressive , said the man next him
. and then they both began sniffing , and , at the third sniff , they caught it right on
the chest , and rose up without another word and went out . and then a stout lady got up ,
and said it was disgraceful that a respectable married woman should be harried about in
this way , and gathered up a bag and eight parcels and went . the remaining four
passengers sat on for a while , until a solemn-looking man in the corner , who , from his

21
dress and general appearance , seemed to belong to the undertaker class , said it put him
in mind of dead baby ; and the other three passengers tried to get out of the door at the
same time , and hurt themselves . i smiled at the black gentleman , and said i thought we
were going to have the carriage to ourselves ; and he laughed pleasantly , and said that
some people made such a fuss over a little thing . but even he grew strangely depressed
after we had started , and so , when we reached crewe , i asked him to come and have a
drink . he accepted , and we forced our way into the buffet , where we yelled , and
stamped , and waved our umbrellas for a quarter of an hour ; and then a young lady came ,
and asked us if we wanted anything . what's yours ? i said , turning to my friend . i'll
have half-a-crown's worth of brandy , neat , if you please , miss , he responded . and he
went off quietly after he had drunk it and got into another carriage , which i thought
mean . from crewe i had the compartment to myself , though the train was crowded . as we
drew up at the different stations , the people , seeing my empty carriage , would rush for
it . here y' are , maria ; come along , plenty of room . all right , tom ; we'll get in
here , they would shout . and they would run along , carrying heavy bags , and fight round
the door to get in first . and one would open the door and mount the steps , and stagger
back into the arms of the man behind him ; and they would all come and have a sniff , and
then droop off and squeeze into other carriages , or pay the difference and go first .
from euston , i took the cheeses down to my friend's house . when his wife came into the
room she smelt round for an instant . then she said : what is it ? tell me the worst . i
said : it's cheeses . tom bought them in liverpool , and asked me to bring them up with me
. and i added that i hoped she understood that it had nothing to do with me ; and she said
that she was sure of that , but that she would speak to tom about it when he came back .
my friend was detained in liverpool longer than he expected ; and , three days later , as
he hadn't returned home , his wife called on me . she said : what did tom say about those
cheeses ? i replied that he had directed they were to be kept in a moist place , and that
nobody was to touch them . she said : nobody's likely to touch them . had he smelt them ?
i thought he had , and added that he seemed greatly attached to them . you think he would

22
be upset , she queried , if i gave a man a sovereign to take them away and bury them ? i
answered that i thought he would never smile again . an idea struck her . she said : do
you mind keeping them for him ? let me send them round to you . madam , i replied , for
myself i like the smell of cheese , and the journey the other day with them from liverpool
i shall ever look back upon as a happy ending to a pleasant holiday . but , in this world
, we must consider others . the lady under whose roof i have the honour of residing is a
widow , and , for all i know , possibly an orphan too . she has a strong , i may say an
eloquent , objection to being what she terms 'put upon . ' the presence of your husband's
cheeses in her house she would , i instinctively feel , regard as a 'put upon' ; and it
shall never be said that i put upon the widow and the orphan . very well , then , said my
friend's wife , rising , all i have to say is , that i shall take the children and go to
an hotel until those cheeses are eaten . i decline to live any longer in the same house
with them . she kept her word , leaving the place in charge of the charwoman , who , when
asked if she could stand the smell , replied , what smell ? and who , when taken close to
the cheeses and told to sniff hard , said she could detect a faint odour of melons . it
was argued from this that little injury could result to the woman from the atmosphere ,
and she was left . the hotel bill came to fifteen guineas ; and my friend , after
reckoning everything up , found that the cheeses had cost him eight-and-sixpence a pound .
he said he dearly loved a bit of cheese , but it was beyond his means ; so he determined
to get rid of them . he threw them into the canal ; but had to fish them out again , as
the bargemen complained . they said it made them feel quite faint . and , after that , he
took them one dark night and left them in the parish mortuary . but the coroner discovered
them , and made a fearful fuss . he said it was a plot to deprive him of his living by
waking up the corpses . my friend got rid of them , at last , by taking them down to a
sea-side town , and burying them on the beach . it gained the place quite a reputation .
visitors said they had never noticed before how strong the air was , and weak-chested and
consumptive people used to throng there for years afterwards . fond as i am of cheese ,
therefore , i hold that george was right in declining to take any . we shan't want any tea

23
, said george harris's face fell at this ; but we'll have a good round , square , slap-up
meal at seven -- dinner , tea , and supper combined . harris grew more cheerful . george
suggested meat and fruit pies , cold meat , tomatoes , fruit , and green stuff . for drink
, we took some wonderful sticky concoction of harris's , which you mixed with water and
called lemonade , plenty of tea , and a bottle of whisky , in case , as george said , we
got upset . it seemed to me that george harped too much on the getting-upset idea . it
seemed to me the wrong spirit to go about the trip in . but i'm glad we took the whisky .
we didn't take beer or wine . they are a mistake up the river . they make you feel sleepy
and heavy . a glass in the evening when you are doing a mouch round the town and looking
at the girls is all right enough ; but don't drink when the sun is blazing down on your
head , and you've got hard work to do . we made a list of the things to be taken , and a
pretty lengthy one it was , before we parted that evening . the next day , which was
friday , we got them all together , and met in the evening to pack . we got a big
gladstone for the clothes , and a couple of hampers for the victuals and the cooking
utensils . we moved the table up against the window , piled everything in a heap in the
middle of the floor , and sat round and looked at it . i said i'd pack . i rather pride
myself on my packing . packing is one of those many things that i feel i know more about
than any other person living . it surprises me myself , sometimes , how many of these
subjects there are . i impressed the fact upon george and harris , and told them that they
had better leave the whole matter entirely to me . they fell into the suggestion with a
readiness that had something uncanny about it . george put on a pipe and spread himself
over the easy-chair , and harris cocked his legs on the table and lit a cigar . this was
hardly what i intended . what i had meant , of course , was , that i should boss the job ,
and that harris and george should potter about under my directions , i pushing them aside
every now and then with , oh , you -- ! here , let me do it . there you are , simple
enough ! -- really teaching them , as you might say . their taking it in the way they did
irritated me . there is nothing does irritate me more than seeing other people sitting
about doing nothing when i'm working . i lived with a man once who used to make me mad

24
CHAPTER 3

that way . he would loll on the sofa and watch me doing things by the hour together ,
following me round the room with his eyes , wherever i went . he said it did him real good
to look on at me , messing about . he said it made him feel that life was not an idle
dream to be gaped and yawned through , but a noble task , full of duty and stern work . he
said he often wondered now how he could have gone on before he met me , never having
anybody to look at while they worked . now , i'm not like that . i can't sit still and see
another man slaving and working . i want to get up and superintend , and walk round with
my hands in my pockets , and tell him what to do . it is my energetic nature . i can't
help it . however , i did not say anything , but started the packing . it seemed a longer
job than i had thought it was going to be ; but i got the bag finished at last , and i sat
on it and strapped it . ain't you going to put the boots in ? said harris . and i looked
round , and found i had forgotten them . that's just like harris . he couldn't have said a
word until i'd got the bag shut and strapped , of course . and george laughed -- one of
those irritating , senseless , chuckle-headed , crack-jawed laughs of his . they do make
me so wild . i opened the bag and packed the boots in ; and then , just as i was going to
close it , a horrible idea occurred to me . had i packed my tooth-brush ? i don't know how
it is , but i never do know whether i've packed my tooth-brush . my tooth-brush is a thing
that haunts me when i'm travelling , and makes my life a misery . i dream that i haven't
packed it , and wake up in a cold perspiration , and get out of bed and hunt for it . and
, in the morning , i pack it before i have used it , and have to unpack again to get it ,
and it is always the last thing i turn out of the bag ; and then i repack and forget it ,
and have to rush upstairs for it at the last moment and carry it to the railway station ,
wrapped up in my pocket-handkerchief . of course i had to turn every mortal thing out now
, and , of course , i could not find it . i rummaged the things up into much the same
state that they must have been before the world was created , and when chaos reigned . of
course , i found george's and harris's eighteen times over , but i couldn't find my own .

25
i put the things back one by one , and held everything up and shook it . then i found it
inside a boot . i repacked once more . when i had finished , george asked if the soap was
in . i said i didn't care a hang whether the soap was in or whether it wasn't ; and i
slammed the bag to and strapped it , and found that i had packed my tobacco-pouch in it ,
and had to re-open it . it got shut up finally at 10 . 5 p . m . , and then there remained
the hampers to do . harris said that we should be wanting to start in less than twelve
hours' time , and thought that he and george had better do the rest ; and i agreed and sat
down , and they had a go . they began in a light-hearted spirit , evidently intending to
show me how to do it . i made no comment ; i only waited . when george is hanged , harris
will be the worst packer in this world ; and i looked at the piles of plates and cups ,
and kettles , and bottles and jars , and pies , and stoves , and cakes , and tomatoes , &c
. , and felt that the thing would soon become exciting . it did . they started with
breaking a cup . that was the first thing they did . they did that just to show you what
they could do , and to get you interested . then harris packed the strawberry jam on top
of a tomato and squashed it , and they had to pick out the tomato with a teaspoon . and
then it was george's turn , and he trod on the butter . i didn't say anything , but i came
over and sat on the edge of the table and watched them . it irritated them more than
anything i could have said . i felt that . it made them nervous and excited , and they
stepped on things , and put things behind them , and then couldn't find them when they
wanted them ; and they packed the pies at the bottom , and put heavy things on top , and
smashed the pies in . they upset salt over everything , and as for the butter ! i never
saw two men do more with one-and-twopence worth of butter in my whole life than they did .
after george had got it off his slipper , they tried to put it in the kettle . it wouldn't
go in , and what was in wouldn't come out . they did scrape it out at last , and put it
down on a chair , and harris sat on it , and it stuck to him , and they went looking for
it all over the room . i'll take my oath i put it down on that chair , said george ,
staring at the empty seat . i saw you do it myself , not a minute ago , said harris . then
they started round the room again looking for it ; and then they met again in the centre ,

26
and stared at one another . most extraordinary thing i ever heard of , said george . so
mysterious ! said harris . then george got round at the back of harris and saw it . why ,
here it is all the time , he exclaimed , indignantly . where ? cried harris , spinning
round . stand still , can't you ! roared george , flying after him . and they got it off ,
and packed it in the teapot . montmorency was in it all , of course . montmorency's
ambition in life , is to get in the way and be sworn at . if he can squirm in anywhere
where he particularly is not wanted , and be a perfect nuisance , and make people mad ,
and have things thrown at his head , then he feels his day has not been wasted . to get
somebody to stumble over him , and curse him steadily for an hour , is his highest aim and
object ; and , when he has succeeded in accomplishing this , his conceit becomes quite
unbearable . he came and sat down on things , just when they were wanted to be packed ;
and he laboured under the fixed belief that , whenever harris or george reached out their
hand for anything , it was his cold , damp nose that they wanted . he put his leg into the
jam , and he worried the teaspoons , and he pretended that the lemons were rats , and got
into the hamper and killed three of them before harris could land him with the frying-pan
. harris said i encouraged him . i didn't encourage him . a dog like that don't want any
encouragement . it's the natural , original sin that is born in him that makes him do
things like that . the packing was done at 12 . 50 ; and harris sat on the big hamper ,
and said he hoped nothing would be found broken . george said that if anything was broken
it was broken , which reflection seemed to comfort him . he also said he was ready for bed
. we were all ready for bed . harris was to sleep with us that night , and we went
upstairs . we tossed for beds , and harris had to sleep with me . he said : do you prefer
the inside or the outside , j . ? i said i generally preferred to sleep inside a bed .
harris said it was old . george said : what time shall i wake you fellows ? harris said :
seven . i said : no -- six , because i wanted to write some letters . harris and i had a
bit of a row over it , but at last split the difference , and said half-past six . wake us
at 6 . 30 , george , we said . george made no answer , and we found , on going over , that
he had been asleep for some time ; so we placed the bath where he could tumble into it on

27
getting out in the morning , and went to bed ourselves . it was mrs . poppets that woke me
up next morning . she said : do you know that it's nearly nine o'clock , sir ? nine o'
what ? i cried , starting up . nine o'clock , she replied , through the keyhole . i
thought you was a-oversleeping yourselves . i woke harris , and told him . he said : i
thought you wanted to get up at six ? so i did , i answered ; why didn't you wake me ? how
could i wake you , when you didn't wake me ? he retorted . now we shan't get on the water
till after twelve . i wonder you take the trouble to get up at all . um , i replied ,
lucky for you that i do . if i hadn't woke you , you'd have lain there for the whole
fortnight . we snarled at one another in this strain for the next few minutes , when we
were interrupted by a defiant snore from george . it reminded us , for the first time
since our being called , of his existence . there he lay -- the man who had wanted to know
what time he should wake us -- on his back , with his mouth wide open , and his knees
stuck up . i don't know why it should be , i am sure ; but the sight of another man asleep
in bed when i am up , maddens me . it seems to me so shocking to see the precious hours of
a man's life -- the priceless moments that will never come back to him again -- being
wasted in mere brutish sleep . there was george , throwing away in hideous sloth the
inestimable gift of time ; his valuable life , every second of which he would have to
account for hereafter , passing away from him , unused . he might have been up stuffing
himself with eggs and bacon , irritating the dog , or flirting with the slavey , instead
of sprawling there , sunk in soul-clogging oblivion . it was a terrible thought . harris
and i appeared to be struck by it at the same instant . we determined to save him , and ,
in this noble resolve , our own dispute was forgotten . we flew across and slung the
clothes off him , and harris landed him one with a slipper , and i shouted in his ear ,
and he awoke . wasermarrer ? he observed , sitting up . get up , you fat-headed chunk !
roared harris . it's quarter to ten . what ! he shrieked , jumping out of bed into the
bath ; who the thunder put this thing here ? we told him he must have been a fool not to
see the bath . we finished dressing , and , when it came to the extras , we remembered
that we had packed the tooth-brushes and the brush and comb that tooth-brush of mine will

28
be the death of me , i know , and we had to go downstairs , and fish them out of the bag .
and when we had done that george wanted the shaving tackle . we told him that he would
have to go without shaving that morning , as we weren't going to unpack that bag again for
him , nor for anyone like him . he said : don't be absurd . how can i go into the city
like this ? it was certainly rather rough on the city , but what cared we for human
suffering ? as harris said , in his common , vulgar way , the city would have to lump it .
we went downstairs to breakfast . montmorency had invited two other dogs to come and see
him off , and they were whiling away the time by fighting on the doorstep . we calmed them
with an umbrella , and sat down to chops and cold beef . harris said : the great thing is
to make a good breakfast , and he started with a couple of chops , saying that he would
take these while they were hot , as the beef could wait . george got hold of the paper ,
and read us out the boating fatalities , and the weather forecast , which latter
prophesied rain , cold , wet to fine whatever more than usually ghastly thing in weather
that may be , occasional local thunder-storms , east wind , with general depression over
the midland counties london and channel . bar . falling . i do think that , of all the
silly , irritating tomfoolishness by which we are plagued , this weather-forecast fraud is
about the most aggravating . it forecasts precisely what happened yesterday or the day
before , and precisely the opposite of what is going to happen to-day . i remember a
holiday of mine being completely ruined one late autumn by our paying attention to the
weather report of the local newspaper . heavy showers , with thunderstorms , may be
expected to-day , it would say on monday , and so we would give up our picnic , and stop
indoors all day , waiting for the rain . -- and people would pass the house , going off in
wagonettes and coaches as jolly and merry as could be , the sun shining out , and not a
cloud to be seen . ah ! we said , as we stood looking out at them through the window ,
won't they come home soaked ! and we chuckled to think how wet they were going to get ,
and came back and stirred the fire , and got our books , and arranged our specimens of
seaweed and cockle shells . by twelve o'clock , with the sun pouring into the room , the
heat became quite oppressive , and we wondered when those heavy showers and occasional

29
thunderstorms were going to begin . ah ! they'll come in the afternoon , you'll find , we
said to each other . oh , won't those people get wet . what a lark ! at one o'clock , the
landlady would come in to ask if we weren't going out , as it seemed such a lovely day .
no , no , we replied , with a knowing chuckle , not we . we don't mean to get wet -- no ,
no . and when the afternoon was nearly gone , and still there was no sign of rain , we
tried to cheer ourselves up with the idea that it would come down all at once , just as
the people had started for home , and were out of the reach of any shelter , and that they
would thus get more drenched than ever . but not a drop ever fell , and it finished a
grand day , and a lovely night after it . the next morning we would read that it was going
to be a warm , fine to set-fair day ; much heat ; and we would dress ourselves in flimsy
things , and go out , and , half-an-hour after we had started , it would commence to rain
hard , and a bitterly cold wind would spring up , and both would keep on steadily for the
whole day , and we would come home with colds and rheumatism all over us , and go to bed .
the weather is a thing that is beyond me altogether . i never can understand it . the
barometer is useless : it is as misleading as the newspaper forecast . there was one
hanging up in a hotel at oxford at which i was staying last spring , and , when i got
there , it was pointing to set fair . it was simply pouring with rain outside , and had
been all day ; and i couldn't quite make matters out . i tapped the barometer , and it
jumped up and pointed to very dry . the boots stopped as he was passing , and said he
expected it meant to-morrow . i fancied that maybe it was thinking of the week before last
, but boots said , no , he thought not . i tapped it again the next morning , and it went
up still higher , and the rain came down faster than ever . on wednesday i went and hit it
again , and the pointer went round towards set fair , very dry , and much heat , until it
was stopped by the peg , and couldn't go any further . it tried its best , but the
instrument was built so that it couldn't prophesy fine weather any harder than it did
without breaking itself . it evidently wanted to go on , and prognosticate drought , and
water famine , and sunstroke , and simooms , and such things , but the peg prevented it ,
and it had to be content with pointing to the mere commonplace very dry . meanwhile , the

30
rain came down in a steady torrent , and the lower part of the town was under water ,
owing to the river having overflowed . boots said it was evident that we were going to
have a prolonged spell of grand weather some time , and read out a poem which was printed
over the top of the oracle , about long foretold , long last ; short notice , soon past .
the fine weather never came that summer . i expect that machine must have been referring
to the following spring . then there are those new style of barometers , the long straight
ones . i never can make head or tail of those . there is one side for 10 a . m . yesterday
, and one side for 10 a . m . to-day ; but you can't always get there as early as ten ,
you know . it rises or falls for rain and fine , with much or less wind , and one end is
nly and the other ely what's ely got to do with it ? , and if you tap it , it doesn't tell
you anything . and you've got to correct it to sea-level , and reduce it to fahrenheit ,
and even then i don't know the answer . but who wants to be foretold the weather ? it is
bad enough when it comes , without our having the misery of knowing about it beforehand .
the prophet we like is the old man who , on the particularly gloomy-looking morning of
some day when we particularly want it to be fine , looks round the horizon with a
particularly knowing eye , and says : oh no , sir , i think it will clear up all right .
it will break all right enough , sir . ah , he knows , we say , as we wish him
good-morning , and start off ; wonderful how these old fellows can tell ! and we feel an
affection for that man which is not at all lessened by the circumstances of its not
clearing up , but continuing to rain steadily all day . ah , well , we feel , he did his
best . for the man that prophesies us bad weather , on the contrary , we entertain only
bitter and revengeful thoughts . going to clear up , d'ye think ? we shout , cheerily , as
we pass . well , no , sir ; i'm afraid it's settled down for the day , he replies ,
shaking his head . stupid old fool ! we mutter , what's he know about it ? and , if his
portent proves correct , we come back feeling still more angry against him , and with a
vague notion that , somehow or other , he has had something to do with it . it was too
bright and sunny on this especial morning for george's blood-curdling readings about bar .
falling , atmospheric disturbance , passing in an oblique line over southern europe , and

31
pressure increasing , to very much upset us : and so , finding that he could not make us
wretched , and was only wasting his time , he sneaked the cigarette that i had carefully
rolled up for myself , and went . then harris and i , having finished up the few things
left on the table , carted out our luggage on to the doorstep , and waited for a cab .
there seemed a good deal of luggage , when we put it all together . there was the
gladstone and the small hand-bag , and the two hampers , and a large roll of rugs , and
some four or five overcoats and macintoshes , and a few umbrellas , and then there was a
melon by itself in a bag , because it was too bulky to go in anywhere , and a couple of
pounds of grapes in another bag , and a japanese paper umbrella , and a frying pan , which
, being too long to pack , we had wrapped round with brown paper . it did look a lot , and
harris and i began to feel rather ashamed of it , though why we should be , i can't see .
no cab came by , but the street boys did , and got interested in the show , apparently ,
and stopped . biggs's boy was the first to come round . biggs is our greengrocer , and his
chief talent lies in securing the services of the most abandoned and unprincipled
errand-boys that civilisation has as yet produced . if anything more than usually
villainous in the boy-line crops up in our neighbourhood , we know that it is biggs's
latest . i was told that , at the time of the great coram street murder , it was promptly
concluded by our street that biggs's boy for that period was at the bottom of it , and had
he not been able , in reply to the severe cross-examination to which he was subjected by
no . 19 , when he called there for orders the morning after the crime assisted by no . 21
, who happened to be on the step at the time , to prove a complete alibi , it would have
gone hard with him . i didn't know biggs's boy at that time , but , from what i have seen
of them since , i should not have attached much importance to that alibi myself . biggs's
boy , as i have said , came round the corner . he was evidently in a great hurry when he
first dawned upon the vision , but , on catching sight of harris and me , and montmorency
, and the things , he eased up and stared . harris and i frowned at him . this might have
wounded a more sensitive nature , but biggs's boys are not , as a rule , touchy . he came
to a dead stop , a yard from our step , and , leaning up against the railings , and

32
selecting a straw to chew , fixed us with his eye . he evidently meant to see this thing
out . in another moment , the grocer's boy passed on the opposite side of the street .
biggs's boy hailed him : hi ! ground floor o' 42's a-moving . the grocer's boy came across
, and took up a position on the other side of the step . then the young gentleman from the
boot-shop stopped , and joined biggs's boy ; while the empty-can superintendent from the
blue posts took up an independent position on the curb . they ain't a-going to starve ,
are they ? said the gentleman from the boot-shop . ah ! you'd want to take a thing or two
with you , retorted the blue posts , if you was a-going to cross the atlantic in a small
boat . they ain't a-going to cross the atlantic , struck in biggs's boy ; they're a-going
to find stanley . by this time , quite a small crowd had collected , and people were
asking each other what was the matter . one party the young and giddy portion of the crowd
held that it was a wedding , and pointed out harris as the bridegroom ; while the elder
and more thoughtful among the populace inclined to the idea that it was a funeral , and
that i was probably the corpse's brother . at last , an empty cab turned up it is a street
where , as a rule , and when they are not wanted , empty cabs pass at the rate of three a
minute , and hang about , and get in your way , and packing ourselves and our belongings
into it , and shooting out a couple of montmorency's friends , who had evidently sworn
never to forsake him , we drove away amidst the cheers of the crowd , biggs's boy shying a
carrot after us for luck . we got to waterloo at eleven , and asked where the eleven-five
started from . of course nobody knew ; nobody at waterloo ever does know where a train is
going to start from , or where a train when it does start is going to , or anything about
it . the porter who took our things thought it would go from number two platform , while
another porter , with whom he discussed the question , had heard a rumour that it would go
from number one . the station-master , on the other hand , was convinced it would start
from the local . to put an end to the matter , we went upstairs , and asked the traffic
superintendent , and he told us that he had just met a man , who said he had seen it at
number three platform . we went to number three platform , but the authorities there said
that they rather thought that train was the southampton express , or else the windsor loop

33
. but they were sure it wasn't the kingston train , though why they were sure it wasn't
they couldn't say . then our porter said he thought that must be it on the high-level
platform ; said he thought he knew the train . so we went to the high-level platform , and
saw the engine-driver , and asked him if he was going to kingston . he said he couldn't
say for certain of course , but that he rather thought he was . anyhow , if he wasn't the
11 . 5 for kingston , he said he was pretty confident he was the 9 . 32 for virginia water
, or the 10 a . m . express for the isle of wight , or somewhere in that direction , and
we should all know when we got there . we slipped half-a-crown into his hand , and begged
him to be the 11 . 5 for kingston . nobody will ever know , on this line , we said , what
you are , or where you're going . you know the way , you slip off quietly and go to
kingston . well , i don't know , gents , replied the noble fellow , but i suppose some
train's got to go to kingston ; and i'll do it . gimme the half-crown . thus we got to
kingston by the london and south-western railway . we learnt , afterwards , that the train
we had come by was really the exeter mail , and that they had spent hours at waterloo ,
looking for it , and nobody knew what had become of it . our boat was waiting for us at
kingston just below bridge , and to it we wended our way , and round it we stored our
luggage , and into it we stepped . are you all right , sir ? said the man . right it is ,
we answered ; and with harris at the sculls and i at the tiller-lines , and montmorency ,
unhappy and deeply suspicious , in the prow , out we shot on to the waters which , for a
fortnight , were to be our home . it was a glorious morning , late spring or early summer
, as you care to take it , when the dainty sheen of grass and leaf is blushing to a deeper
green ; and the year seems like a fair young maid , trembling with strange , wakening
pulses on the brink of womanhood . the quaint back streets of kingston , where they came
down to the water's edge , looked quite picturesque in the flashing sunlight , the
glinting river with its drifting barges , the wooded towpath , the trim-kept villas on the
other side , harris , in a red and orange blazer , grunting away at the sculls , the
distant glimpses of the grey old palace of the tudors , all made a sunny picture , so
bright but calm , so full of life , and yet so peaceful , that , early in the day though

34
it was , i felt myself being dreamily lulled off into a musing fit . i mused on kingston ,
or kyningestun , as it was once called in the days when saxon kinges were crowned there .
great caesar crossed the river there , and the roman legions camped upon its sloping
uplands . caesar , like , in later years , elizabeth , seems to have stopped everywhere :
only he was more respectable than good queen bess ; he didn't put up at the public-houses
. she was nuts on public-houses , was england's virgin queen . there's scarcely a pub . of
any attractions within ten miles of london that she does not seem to have looked in at ,
or stopped at , or slept at , some time or other . i wonder now , supposing harris , say ,
turned over a new leaf , and became a great and good man , and got to be prime minister ,
and died , if they would put up signs over the public-houses that he had patronised :
harris had a glass of bitter in this house ; harris had two of scotch cold here in the
summer of '88 ; harris was chucked from here in december , 1886 . no , there would be too
many of them ! it would be the houses that he had never entered that would become famous .
only house in south london that harris never had a drink in ! the people would flock to it
to see what could have been the matter with it . how poor weak-minded king edwy must have
hated kyningestun ! the coronation feast had been too much for him . maybe boar's head
stuffed with sugar-plums did not agree with him it wouldn't with me , i know , and he had
had enough of sack and mead ; so he slipped from the noisy revel to steal a quiet
moonlight hour with his beloved elgiva . perhaps , from the casement , standing
hand-in-hand , they were watching the calm moonlight on the river , while from the distant
halls the boisterous revelry floated in broken bursts of faint-heard din and tumult . then
brutal odo and st . dunstan force their rude way into the quiet room , and hurl coarse
insults at the sweet-faced queen , and drag poor edwy back to the loud clamour of the
drunken brawl . years later , to the crash of battle-music , saxon kings and saxon revelry
were buried side by side , and kingston's greatness passed away for a time , to rise once
more when hampton court became the palace of the tudors and the stuarts , and the royal
barges strained at their moorings on the river's bank , and bright-cloaked gallants
swaggered down the water-steps to cry : what ferry , ho ! gadzooks , gramercy . many of

35
the old houses , round about , speak very plainly of those days when kingston was a royal
borough , and nobles and courtiers lived there , near their king , and the long road to
the palace gates was gay all day with clanking steel and prancing palfreys , and rustling
silks and velvets , and fair faces . the large and spacious houses , with their oriel ,
latticed windows , their huge fireplaces , and their gabled roofs , breathe of the days of
hose and doublet , of pearl-embroidered stomachers , and complicated oaths . they were
upraised in the days when men knew how to build . the hard red bricks have only grown more
firmly set with time , and their oak stairs do not creak and grunt when you try to go down
them quietly . speaking of oak staircases reminds me that there is a magnificent carved
oak staircase in one of the houses in kingston . it is a shop now , in the market-place ,
but it was evidently once the mansion of some great personage . a friend of mine , who
lives at kingston , went in there to buy a hat one day , and , in a thoughtless moment ,
put his hand in his pocket and paid for it then and there . the shopman he knows my friend
was naturally a little staggered at first ; but , quickly recovering himself , and feeling
that something ought to be done to encourage this sort of thing , asked our hero if he
would like to see some fine old carved oak . my friend said he would , and the shopman ,
thereupon , took him through the shop , and up the staircase of the house . the balusters
were a superb piece of workmanship , and the wall all the way up was oak-panelled , with
carving that would have done credit to a palace . from the stairs , they went into the
drawing-room , which was a large , bright room , decorated with a somewhat startling
though cheerful paper of a blue ground . there was nothing , however , remarkable about
the apartment , and my friend wondered why he had been brought there . the proprietor went
up to the paper , and tapped it . it gave forth a wooden sound . oak , he explained . all
carved oak , right up to the ceiling , just the same as you saw on the staircase . but ,
great caesar ! man , expostulated my friend ; you don't mean to say you have covered over
carved oak with blue wall-paper ? yes , was the reply : it was expensive work . had to
match-board it all over first , of course . but the room looks cheerful now . it was awful
gloomy before . i can't say i altogether blame the man which is doubtless a great relief

36
CHAPTER 4

to his mind . from his point of view , which would be that of the average householder ,
desiring to take life as lightly as possible , and not that of the old-curiosity-shop
maniac , there is reason on his side . carved oak is very pleasant to look at , and to
have a little of , but it is no doubt somewhat depressing to live in , for those whose
fancy does not lie that way . it would be like living in a church . no , what was sad in
his case was that he , who didn't care for carved oak , should have his drawing-room
panelled with it , while people who do care for it have to pay enormous prices to get it .
it seems to be the rule of this world . each person has what he doesn't want , and other
people have what he does want . married men have wives , and don't seem to want them ; and
young single fellows cry out that they can't get them . poor people who can hardly keep
themselves have eight hearty children . rich old couples , with no one to leave their
money to , die childless . then there are girls with lovers . the girls that have lovers
never want them . they say they would rather be without them , that they bother them , and
why don't they go and make love to miss smith and miss brown , who are plain and elderly ,
and haven't got any lovers ? they themselves don't want lovers . they never mean to marry
. it does not do to dwell on these things ; it makes one so sad . there was a boy at our
school , we used to call him sandford and merton . his real name was stivvings . he was
the most extraordinary lad i ever came across . i believe he really liked study . he used
to get into awful rows for sitting up in bed and reading greek ; and as for french
irregular verbs there was simply no keeping him away from them . he was full of weird and
unnatural notions about being a credit to his parents and an honour to the school ; and he
yearned to win prizes , and grow up and be a clever man , and had all those sorts of
weak-minded ideas . i never knew such a strange creature , yet harmless , mind you , as
the babe unborn . well , that boy used to get ill about twice a week , so that he couldn't
go to school . there never was such a boy to get ill as that sandford and merton . if
there was any known disease going within ten miles of him , he had it , and had it badly .

37
he would take bronchitis in the dog-days , and have hay-fever at christmas . after a six
weeks' period of drought , he would be stricken down with rheumatic fever ; and he would
go out in a november fog and come home with a sunstroke . they put him under laughing-gas
one year , poor lad , and drew all his teeth , and gave him a false set , because he
suffered so terribly with toothache ; and then it turned to neuralgia and ear-ache . he
was never without a cold , except once for nine weeks while he had scarlet fever ; and he
always had chilblains . during the great cholera scare of 1871 , our neighbourhood was
singularly free from it . there was only one reputed case in the whole parish : that case
was young stivvings . he had to stop in bed when he was ill , and eat chicken and custards
and hot-house grapes ; and he would lie there and sob , because they wouldn't let him do
latin exercises , and took his german grammar away from him . and we other boys , who
would have sacrificed ten terms of our school-life for the sake of being ill for a day ,
and had no desire whatever to give our parents any excuse for being stuck-up about us ,
couldn't catch so much as a stiff neck . we fooled about in draughts , and it did us good
, and freshened us up ; and we took things to make us sick , and they made us fat , and
gave us an appetite . nothing we could think of seemed to make us ill until the holidays
began . then , on the breaking-up day , we caught colds , and whooping cough , and all
kinds of disorders , which lasted till the term recommenced ; when , in spite of
everything we could manoeuvre to the contrary , we would get suddenly well again , and be
better than ever . such is life ; and we are but as grass that is cut down , and put into
the oven and baked . to go back to the carved-oak question , they must have had very fair
notions of the artistic and the beautiful , our great-great-grandfathers . why , all our
art treasures of to-day are only the dug-up commonplaces of three or four hundred years
ago . i wonder if there is real intrinsic beauty in the old soup-plates , beer-mugs , and
candle-snuffers that we prize so now , or if it is only the halo of age glowing around
them that gives them their charms in our eyes . the old blue that we hang about our walls
as ornaments were the common every-day household utensils of a few centuries ago ; and the
pink shepherds and the yellow shepherdesses that we hand round now for all our friends to

38
gush over , and pretend they understand , were the unvalued mantel-ornaments that the
mother of the eighteenth century would have given the baby to suck when he cried . will it
be the same in the future ? will the prized treasures of to-day always be the cheap
trifles of the day before ? will rows of our willow-pattern dinner-plates be ranged above
the chimneypieces of the great in the years 2000 and odd ? will the white cups with the
gold rim and the beautiful gold flower inside species unknown , that our sarah janes now
break in sheer light-heartedness of spirit , be carefully mended , and stood upon a
bracket , and dusted only by the lady of the house ? that china dog that ornaments the
bedroom of my furnished lodgings . it is a white dog . its eyes blue . its nose is a
delicate red , with spots . its head is painfully erect , its expression is amiability
carried to verge of imbecility . i do not admire it myself . considered as a work of art ,
i may say it irritates me . thoughtless friends jeer at it , and even my landlady herself
has no admiration for it , and excuses its presence by the circumstance that her aunt gave
it to her . but in 200 years' time it is more than probable that that dog will be dug up
from somewhere or other , minus its legs , and with its tail broken , and will be sold for
old china , and put in a glass cabinet . and people will pass it round , and admire it .
they will be struck by the wonderful depth of the colour on the nose , and speculate as to
how beautiful the bit of the tail that is lost no doubt was . we , in this age , do not
see the beauty of that dog . we are too familiar with it . it is like the sunset and the
stars : we are not awed by their loveliness because they are common to our eyes . so it is
with that china dog . in 2288 people will gush over it . the making of such dogs will have
become a lost art . our descendants will wonder how we did it , and say how clever we were
. we shall be referred to lovingly as those grand old artists that flourished in the
nineteenth century , and produced those china dogs . the sampler that the eldest daughter
did at school will be spoken of as tapestry of the victorian era , and be almost priceless
. the blue-and-white mugs of the present-day roadside inn will be hunted up , all cracked
and chipped , and sold for their weight in gold , and rich people will use them for claret
cups ; and travellers from japan will buy up all the presents from ramsgate , and

39
souvenirs of margate , that may have escaped destruction , and take them back to jedo as
ancient english curios . at this point harris threw away the sculls , got up and left his
seat , and sat on his back , and stuck his legs in the air . montmorency howled , and
turned a somersault , and the top hamper jumped up , and all the things came out . i was
somewhat surprised , but i did not lose my temper . i said , pleasantly enough : hulloa !
what's that for ? what's that for ? why -- no , on second thoughts , i will not repeat
what harris said . i may have been to blame , i admit it ; but nothing excuses violence of
language and coarseness of expression , especially in a man who has been carefully brought
up , as i know harris has been . i was thinking of other things , and forgot , as any one
might easily understand , that i was steering , and the consequence was that we had got
mixed up a good deal with the tow-path . it was difficult to say , for the moment , which
was us and which was the middlesex bank of the river ; but we found out after a while ,
and separated ourselves . harris , however , said he had done enough for a bit , and
proposed that i should take a turn ; so , as we were in , i got out and took the tow-line
, and ran the boat on past hampton court . what a dear old wall that is that runs along by
the river there ! i never pass it without feeling better for the sight of it . such a
mellow , bright , sweet old wall ; what a charming picture it would make , with the lichen
creeping here , and the moss growing there , a shy young vine peeping over the top at this
spot , to see what is going on upon the busy river , and the sober old ivy clustering a
little farther down ! there are fifty shades and tints and hues in every ten yards of that
old wall . if i could only draw , and knew how to paint , i could make a lovely sketch of
that old wall , i'm sure . i've often thought i should like to live at hampton court . it
looks so peaceful and so quiet , and it is such a dear old place to ramble round in the
early morning before many people are about . but , there , i don't suppose i should really
care for it when it came to actual practice . it would be so ghastly dull and depressing
in the evening , when your lamp cast uncanny shadows on the panelled walls , and the echo
of distant feet rang through the cold stone corridors , and now drew nearer , and now died
away , and all was death-like silence , save the beating of one's own heart . we are

40
creatures of the sun , we men and women . we love light and life . that is why we crowd
into the towns and cities , and the country grows more and more deserted every year . in
the sunlight -- in the daytime , when nature is alive and busy all around us , we like the
open hill-sides and the deep woods well enough : but in the night , when our mother earth
has gone to sleep , and left us waking , oh ! the world seems so lonesome , and we get
frightened , like children in a silent house . then we sit and sob , and long for the
gas-lit streets , and the sound of human voices , and the answering throb of human life .
we feel so helpless and so little in the great stillness , when the dark trees rustle in
the night-wind . there are so many ghosts about , and their silent sighs make us feel so
sad . let us gather together in the great cities , and light huge bonfires of a million
gas-jets , and shout and sing together , and feel brave . harris asked me if i'd ever been
in the maze at hampton court . he said he went in once to show somebody else the way . he
had studied it up in a map , and it was so simple that it seemed foolish -- hardly worth
the twopence charged for admission . harris said he thought that map must have been got up
as a practical joke , because it wasn't a bit like the real thing , and only misleading .
it was a country cousin that harris took in . he said : we'll just go in here , so that
you can say you've been , but it's very simple . it's absurd to call it a maze . you keep
on taking the first turning to the right . we'll just walk round for ten minutes , and
then go and get some lunch . they met some people soon after they had got inside , who
said they had been there for three-quarters of an hour , and had had about enough of it .
harris told them they could follow him , if they liked ; he was just going in , and then
should turn round and come out again . they said it was very kind of him , and fell behind
, and followed . they picked up various other people who wanted to get it over , as they
went along , until they had absorbed all the persons in the maze . people who had given up
all hopes of ever getting either in or out , or of ever seeing their home and friends
again , plucked up courage at the sight of harris and his party , and joined the
procession , blessing him . harris said he should judge there must have been twenty people
, following him , in all ; and one woman with a baby , who had been there all the morning

41
, insisted on taking his arm , for fear of losing him . harris kept on turning to the
right , but it seemed a long way , and his cousin said he supposed it was a very big maze
. oh , one of the largest in europe , said harris . yes , it must be , replied the cousin
, because we've walked a good two miles already . harris began to think it rather strange
himself , but he held on until , at last , they passed the half of a penny bun on the
ground that harris's cousin swore he had noticed there seven minutes ago . harris said :
oh , impossible ! but the woman with the baby said , not at all , as she herself had taken
it from the child , and thrown it down there , just before she met harris . she also added
that she wished she never had met harris , and expressed an opinion that he was an
impostor . that made harris mad , and he produced his map , and explained his theory . the
map may be all right enough , said one of the party , if you know whereabouts in it we are
now . harris didn't know , and suggested that the best thing to do would be to go back to
the entrance , and begin again . for the beginning again part of it there was not much
enthusiasm ; but with regard to the advisability of going back to the entrance there was
complete unanimity , and so they turned , and trailed after harris again , in the opposite
direction . about ten minutes more passed , and then they found themselves in the centre .
harris thought at first of pretending that that was what he had been aiming at ; but the
crowd looked dangerous , and he decided to treat it as an accident . anyhow , they had got
something to start from then . they did know where they were , and the map was once more
consulted , and the thing seemed simpler than ever , and off they started for the third
time . and three minutes later they were back in the centre again . after that , they
simply couldn't get anywhere else . whatever way they turned brought them back to the
middle . it became so regular at length , that some of the people stopped there , and
waited for the others to take a walk round , and come back to them . harris drew out his
map again , after a while , but the sight of it only infuriated the mob , and they told
him to go and curl his hair with it . harris said that he couldn't help feeling that , to
a certain extent , he had become unpopular . they all got crazy at last , and sang out for
the keeper , and the man came and climbed up the ladder outside , and shouted out

42
directions to them . but all their heads were , by this time , in such a confused whirl
that they were incapable of grasping anything , and so the man told them to stop where
they were , and he would come to them . they huddled together , and waited ; and he
climbed down , and came in . he was a young keeper , as luck would have it , and new to
the business ; and when he got in , he couldn't find them , and he wandered about , trying
to get to them , and then he got lost . they caught sight of him , every now and then ,
rushing about the other side of the hedge , and he would see them , and rush to get to
them , and they would wait there for about five minutes , and then he would reappear again
in exactly the same spot , and ask them where they had been . they had to wait till one of
the old keepers came back from his dinner before they got out . harris said he thought it
was a very fine maze , so far as he was a judge ; and we agreed that we would try to get
george to go into it , on our way back . it was while passing through moulsey lock that
harris told me about his maze experience . it took us some time to pass through , as we
were the only boat , and it is a big lock . i don't think i ever remember to have seen
moulsey lock , before , with only one boat in it . it is , i suppose , boulter's not even
excepted , the busiest lock on the river . i have stood and watched it , sometimes , when
you could not see any water at all , but only a brilliant tangle of bright blazers , and
gay caps , and saucy hats , and many-coloured parasols , and silken rugs , and cloaks ,
and streaming ribbons , and dainty whites ; when looking down into the lock from the quay
, you might fancy it was a huge box into which flowers of every hue and shade had been
thrown pell-mell , and lay piled up in a rainbow heap , that covered every corner . on a
fine sunday it presents this appearance nearly all day long , while , up the stream , and
down the stream , lie , waiting their turn , outside the gates , long lines of still more
boats ; and boats are drawing near and passing away , so that the sunny river , from the
palace up to hampton church , is dotted and decked with yellow , and blue , and orange ,
and white , and red , and pink . all the inhabitants of hampton and moulsey dress
themselves up in boating costume , and come and mouch round the lock with their dogs , and
flirt , and smoke , and watch the boats ; and , altogether , what with the caps and

43
jackets of the men , the pretty coloured dresses of the women , the excited dogs , the
moving boats , the white sails , the pleasant landscape , and the sparkling water , it is
one of the gayest sights i know of near this dull old london town . the river affords a
good opportunity for dress . for once in a way , we men are able to show our taste in
colours , and i think we come out very natty , if you ask me . i always like a little red
in my things -- red and black . you know my hair is a sort of golden brown , rather a
pretty shade i've been told , and a dark red matches it beautifully ; and then i always
think a light-blue necktie goes so well with it , and a pair of those russian-leather
shoes and a red silk handkerchief round the waist -- a handkerchief looks so much better
than a belt . harris always keeps to shades or mixtures of orange or yellow , but i don't
think he is at all wise in this . his complexion is too dark for yellows . yellows don't
suit him : there can be no question about it . i want him to take to blue as a background
, with white or cream for relief ; but , there ! the less taste a person has in dress ,
the more obstinate he always seems to be . it is a great pity , because he will never be a
success as it is , while there are one or two colours in which he might not really look so
bad , with his hat on . george has bought some new things for this trip , and i'm rather
vexed about them . the blazer is loud . i should not like george to know that i thought so
, but there really is no other word for it . he brought it home and showed it to us on
thursday evening . we asked him what colour he called it , and he said he didn't know . he
didn't think there was a name for the colour . the man had told him it was an oriental
design . george put it on , and asked us what we thought of it . harris said that , as an
object to hang over a flower-bed in early spring to frighten the birds away , he should
respect it ; but that , considered as an article of dress for any human being , except a
margate nigger , it made him ill . george got quite huffy ; but , as harris said , if he
didn't want his opinion , why did he ask for it ? what troubles harris and myself , with
regard to it , is that we are afraid it will attract attention to the boat . girls , also
, don't look half bad in a boat , if prettily dressed . nothing is more fetching , to my
thinking , than a tasteful boating costume . but a boating costume , it would be as well

44
if all ladies would understand , ought to be a costume that can be worn in a boat , and
not merely under a glass-case . it utterly spoils an excursion if you have folk in the
boat who are thinking all the time a good deal more of their dress than of the trip . it
was my misfortune once to go for a water picnic with two ladies of this kind . we did have
a lively time ! they were both beautifully got up -- all lace and silky stuff , and
flowers , and ribbons , and dainty shoes , and light gloves . but they were dressed for a
photographic studio , not for a river picnic . they were the boating costumes of a french
fashion-plate . it was ridiculous , fooling about in them anywhere near real earth , air ,
and water . the first thing was that they thought the boat was not clean . we dusted all
the seats for them , and then assured them that it was , but they didn't believe us . one
of them rubbed the cushion with the forefinger of her glove , and showed the result to the
other , and they both sighed , and sat down , with the air of early christian martyrs
trying to make themselves comfortable up against the stake . you are liable to
occasionally splash a little when sculling , and it appeared that a drop of water ruined
those costumes . the mark never came out , and a stain was left on the dress for ever . i
was stroke . i did my best . i feathered some two feet high , and i paused at the end of
each stroke to let the blades drip before returning them , and i picked out a smooth bit
of water to drop them into again each time . bow said , after a while , that he did not
feel himself a sufficiently accomplished oarsman to pull with me , but that he would sit
still , if i would allow him , and study my stroke . he said it interested him . but ,
notwithstanding all this , and try as i would , i could not help an occasional flicker of
water from going over those dresses . the girls did not complain , but they huddled up
close together , and set their lips firm , and every time a drop touched them , they
visibly shrank and shuddered . it was a noble sight to see them suffering thus in silence
, but it unnerved me altogether . i am too sensitive . i got wild and fitful in my rowing
, and splashed more and more , the harder i tried not to . i gave it up at last ; i said
i'd row bow . bow thought the arrangement would be better too , and we changed places .
the ladies gave an involuntary sigh of relief when they saw me go , and quite brightened

45
up for a moment . poor girls ! they had better have put up with me . the man they had got
now was a jolly , light-hearted , thick-headed sort of a chap , with about as much
sensitiveness in him as there might be in a newfoundland puppy . you might look daggers at
him for an hour and he would not notice it , and it would not trouble him if he did . he
set a good , rollicking , dashing stroke that sent the spray playing all over the boat
like a fountain , and made the whole crowd sit up straight in no time . when he spread
more than pint of water over one of those dresses , he would give a pleasant little laugh
, and say : i beg your pardon , i'm sure ; and offer them his handkerchief to wipe it off
with . oh , it's of no consequence , the poor girls would murmur in reply , and covertly
draw rugs and coats over themselves , and try and protect themselves with their lace
parasols . at lunch they had a very bad time of it . people wanted them to sit on the
grass , and the grass was dusty ; and the tree-trunks , against which they were invited to
lean , did not appear to have been brushed for weeks ; so they spread their handkerchiefs
on the ground and sat on those , bolt upright . somebody , in walking about with a plate
of beef-steak pie , tripped up over a root , and sent the pie flying . none of it went
over them , fortunately , but the accident suggested a fresh danger to them , and agitated
them ; and , whenever anybody moved about , after that , with anything in his hand that
could fall and make a mess , they watched that person with growing anxiety until he sat
down again . now then , you girls , said our friend bow to them , cheerily , after it was
all over , come along , you've got to wash up ! they didn't understand him at first . when
they grasped the idea , they said they feared they did not know how to wash up . oh , i'll
soon show you , he cried ; it's rare fun ! you lie down on your -- i mean you lean over
the bank , you know , and sloush the things about in the water . the elder sister said
that she was afraid that they hadn't got on dresses suited to the work . oh , they'll be
all right , said he light-heartedly ; tuck 'em up . and he made them do it , too . he told
them that that sort of thing was half the fun of a picnic . they said it was very
interesting . now i come to think it over , was that young man as dense-headed as we
thought ? or was he -- no , impossible ! there was such a simple , child-like expression

46
about him ! harris wanted to get out at hampton church , to go and see mrs . thomas's tomb
. who is mrs . thomas ? i asked . how should i know ? replied harris . she's a lady that's
got a funny tomb , and i want to see it . i objected . i don't know whether it is that i
am built wrong , but i never did seem to hanker after tombstones myself . i know that the
proper thing to do , when you get to a village or town , is to rush off to the churchyard
, and enjoy the graves ; but it is a recreation that i always deny myself . i take no
interest in creeping round dim and chilly churches behind wheezy old men , and reading
epitaphs . not even the sight of a bit of cracked brass let into a stone affords me what i
call real happiness . i shock respectable sextons by the imperturbability i am able to
assume before exciting inscriptions , and by my lack of enthusiasm for the local family
history , while my ill-concealed anxiety to get outside wounds their feelings . one golden
morning of a sunny day , i leant against the low stone wall that guarded a little village
church , and i smoked , and drank in deep , calm gladness from the sweet , restful scene
-- the grey old church with its clustering ivy and its quaint carved wooden porch , the
white lane winding down the hill between tall rows of elms , the thatched-roof cottages
peeping above their trim-kept hedges , the silver river in the hollow , the wooded hills
beyond ! it was a lovely landscape . it was idyllic , poetical , and it inspired me . i
felt good and noble . i felt i didn't want to be sinful and wicked any more . i would come
and live here , and never do any more wrong , and lead a blameless , beautiful life , and
have silver hair when i got old , and all that sort of thing . in that moment i forgave
all my friends and relations for their wickedness and cussedness , and i blessed them .
they did not know that i blessed them . they went their abandoned way all unconscious of
what i , far away in that peaceful village , was doing for them ; but i did it , and i
wished that i could let them know that i had done it , because i wanted to make them happy
. i was going on thinking away all these grand , tender thoughts , when my reverie was
broken in upon by a shrill piping voice crying out : all right , sur , i'm a-coming , i'm
a-coming . it's all right , sur ; don't you be in a hurry . i looked up , and saw an old
bald-headed man hobbling across the churchyard towards me , carrying a huge bunch of keys

47
in his hand that shook and jingled at every step . i motioned him away with silent dignity
, but he still advanced , screeching out the while : i'm a-coming , sur , i'm a-coming .
i'm a little lame . i ain't as spry as i used to be . this way , sur . go away , you
miserable old man , i said . i've come as soon as i could , sur , he replied . my missis
never see you till just this minute . you follow me , sur . go away , i repeated ; leave
me before i get over the wall , and slay you . he seemed surprised . don't you want to see
the tombs ? he said . no , i answered , i don't . i want to stop here , leaning up against
this gritty old wall . go away , and don't disturb me . i am chock full of beautiful and
noble thoughts , and i want to stop like it , because it feels nice and good . don't you
come fooling about , making me mad , chivying away all my better feelings with this silly
tombstone nonsense of yours . go away , and get somebody to bury you cheap , and i'll pay
half the expense . he was bewildered for a moment . he rubbed his eyes , and looked hard
at me . i seemed human enough on the outside : he couldn't make it out . he said : yuise a
stranger in these parts ? you don't live here ? no , i said , i don't . you wouldn't if i
did . well then , he said , you want to see the tombs -- graves -- folks been buried , you
know -- coffins ! you are an untruther , i replied , getting roused ; i do not want to see
tombs -- not your tombs . why should i ? we have graves of our own , our family has . why
my uncle podger has a tomb in kensal green cemetery , that is the pride of all that
country-side ; and my grandfather's vault at bow is capable of accommodating eight
visitors , while my great-aunt susan has a brick grave in finchley churchyard , with a
headstone with a coffee-pot sort of thing in bas-relief upon it , and a six-inch best
white stone coping all the way round , that cost pounds . when i want graves , it is to
those places that i go and revel . i do not want other folk's . when you yourself are
buried , i will come and see yours . that is all i can do for you . he burst into tears .
he said that one of the tombs had a bit of stone upon the top of it that had been said by
some to be probably part of the remains of the figure of a man , and that another had some
words , carved upon it , that nobody had ever been able to decipher . i still remained
obdurate , and , in broken-hearted tones , he said : well , won't you come and see the

48
CHAPTER 5

memorial window ? i would not even see that , so he fired his last shot . he drew near ,
and whispered hoarsely : i've got a couple of skulls down in the crypt , he said ; come
and see those . oh , do come and see the skulls ! you are a young man out for a holiday ,
and you want to enjoy yourself . come and see the skulls ! then i turned and fled , and as
i sped i heard him calling to me : oh , come and see the skulls ; come back and see the
skulls ! harris , however , revels in tombs , and graves , and epitaphs , and monumental
inscriptions , and the thought of not seeing mrs . thomas's grave made him crazy . he said
he had looked forward to seeing mrs . thomas's grave from the first moment that the trip
was proposed -- said he wouldn't have joined if it hadn't been for the idea of seeing mrs
. thomas's tomb . i reminded him of george , and how we had to get the boat up to
shepperton by five o'clock to meet him , and then he went for george . why was george to
fool about all day , and leave us to lug this lumbering old top-heavy barge up and down
the river by ourselves to meet him ? why couldn't george come and do some work ? why
couldn't he have got the day off , and come down with us ? bank be blowed ! what good was
he at the bank ? i never see him doing any work there , continued harris , whenever i go
in . he sits behind a bit of glass all day , trying to look as if he was doing something .
what's the good of a man behind a bit of glass ? i have to work for my living . why can't
he work . what use is he there , and what's the good of their banks ? they take your money
, and then , when you draw a cheque , they send it back smeared all over with 'no effects
, ' 'refer to drawer . ' what's the good of that ? that's the sort of trick they served me
twice last week . i'm not going to stand it much longer . i shall withdraw my account . if
he was here , we could go and see that tomb . i don't believe he's at the bank at all .
he's larking about somewhere , that's what he's doing , leaving us to do all the work .
i'm going to get out , and have a drink . i pointed out to him that we were miles away
from a pub . ; and then he went on about the river , and what was the good of the river ,
and was everyone who came on the river to die of thirst ? it is always best to let harris

49
have his head when he gets like this . then he pumps himself out , and is quiet afterwards
. i reminded him that there was concentrated lemonade in the hamper , and a gallon-jar of
water in the nose of the boat , and that the two only wanted mixing to make a cool and
refreshing beverage . then he flew off about lemonade , and such-like sunday-school slops
, as he termed them , ginger-beer , raspberry syrup , &c . , &c . he said they all
produced dyspepsia , and ruined body and soul alike , and were the cause of half the crime
in england . he said he must drink something , however , and climbed upon the seat , and
leant over to get the bottle . it was right at the bottom of the hamper , and seemed
difficult to find , and he had to lean over further and further , and , in trying to steer
at the same time , from a topsy-turvy point of view , he pulled the wrong line , and sent
the boat into the bank , and the shock upset him , and he dived down right into the hamper
, and stood there on his head , holding on to the sides of the boat like grim death , his
legs sticking up into the air . he dared not move for fear of going over , and had to stay
there till i could get hold of his legs , and haul him back , and that made him madder
than ever . we stopped under the willows by kempton park , and lunched . it is a pretty
little spot there : a pleasant grass plateau , running along by the water's edge , and
overhung by willows . we had just commenced the third course -- the bread and jam -- when
a gentleman in shirt-sleeves and a short pipe came along , and wanted to know if we knew
that we were trespassing . we said we hadn't given the matter sufficient consideration as
yet to enable us to arrive at a definite conclusion on that point , but that , if he
assured us on his word as a gentleman that we were trespassing , we would , without
further hesitation , believe it . he gave us the required assurance , and we thanked him ,
but he still hung about , and seemed to be dissatisfied , so we asked him if there was
anything further that we could do for him ; and harris , who is of a chummy disposition ,
offered him a bit of bread and jam . i fancy he must have belonged to some society sworn
to abstain from bread and jam ; for he declined it quite gruffly , as if he were vexed at
being tempted with it , and he added that it was his duty to turn us off . harris said
that if it was a duty it ought to be done , and asked the man what was his idea with

50
regard to the best means for accomplishing it . harris is what you would call a well-made
man of about number one size , and looks hard and bony , and the man measured him up and
down , and said he would go and consult his master , and then come back and chuck us both
into the river . of course , we never saw him any more , and , of course , all he really
wanted was a shilling . there are a certain number of riverside roughs who make quite an
income , during the summer , by slouching about the banks and blackmailing weak-minded
noodles in this way . they represent themselves as sent by the proprietor . the proper
course to pursue is to offer your name and address , and leave the owner , if he really
has anything to do with the matter , to summon you , and prove what damage you have done
to his land by sitting down on a bit of it . but the majority of people are so intensely
lazy and timid , that they prefer to encourage the imposition by giving in to it rather
than put an end to it by the exertion of a little firmness . where it is really the owners
that are to blame , they ought to be shown up . the selfishness of the riparian proprietor
grows with every year . if these men had their way they would close the river thames
altogether . they actually do this along the minor tributary streams and in the backwaters
. they drive posts into the bed of the stream , and draw chains across from bank to bank ,
and nail huge notice-boards on every tree . the sight of those notice-boards rouses every
evil instinct in my nature . i feel i want to tear each one down , and hammer it over the
head of the man who put it up , until i have killed him , and then i would bury him , and
put the board up over the grave as a tombstone . i mentioned these feelings of mine to
harris , and he said he had them worse than that . he said he not only felt he wanted to
kill the man who caused the board to be put up , but that he should like to slaughter the
whole of his family and all his friends and relations , and then burn down his house .
this seemed to me to be going too far , and i said so to harris ; but he answered : not a
bit of it . serve 'em all jolly well right , and i'd go and sing comic songs on the ruins
. i was vexed to hear harris go on in this blood-thirsty strain . we never ought to allow
our instincts of justice to degenerate into mere vindictiveness . it was a long while
before i could get harris to take a more christian view of the subject , but i succeeded

51
at last , and he promised me that he would spare the friends and relations at all events ,
and would not sing comic songs on the ruins . you have never heard harris sing a comic
song , or you would understand the service i had rendered to mankind . it is one of
harris's fixed ideas that he can sing a comic song ; the fixed idea , on the contrary ,
among those of harris's friends who have heard him try , is that he can't and never will
be able to , and that he ought not to be allowed to try . when harris is at a party , and
is asked to sing , he replies : well , i can only sing a comic song , you know ; and he
says it in a tone that implies that his singing of that , however , is a thing that you
ought to hear once , and then die . oh , that is nice , says the hostess . do sing one ,
mr . harris ; and harris gets up , and makes for the piano , with the beaming cheeriness
of a generous-minded man who is just about to give somebody something . now , silence ,
please , everybody says the hostess , turning round ; mr . harris is going to sing a comic
song ! oh , how jolly ! they murmur ; and they hurry in from the conservatory , and come
up from the stairs , and go and fetch each other from all over the house , and crowd into
the drawing-room , and sit round , all smirking in anticipation . then harris begins .
well , you don't look for much of a voice in a comic song . you don't expect correct
phrasing or vocalization . you don't mind if a man does find out , when in the middle of a
note , that he is too high , and comes down with a jerk . you don't bother about time .
you don't mind a man being two bars in front of the accompaniment , and easing up in the
middle of a line to argue it out with the pianist , and then starting the verse afresh .
but you do expect the words . you don't expect a man to never remember more than the first
three lines of the first verse , and to keep on repeating these until it is time to begin
the chorus . you don't expect a man to break off in the middle of a line , and snigger ,
and say , it's very funny , but he's blest if he can think of the rest of it , and then
try and make it up for himself , and , afterwards , suddenly recollect it , when he has
got to an entirely different part of the song , and break off , without a word of warning
, to go back and let you have it then and there . you don't -- well , i will just give you
an idea of harris's comic singing , and then you can judge of it for yourself . harris

52
standing up in front of piano and addressing the expectant mob : i'm afraid it's a very
old thing , you know . i expect you all know it , you know . but it's the only thing i
know . it's the judge's song out of pinafore -- no , i don't mean pinafore -- i mean --
you know what i mean -- the other thing , you know . you must all join in the chorus , you
know . murmurs of delight and anxiety to join in the chorus . brilliant performance of
prelude to the judge's song in trial by jury by nervous pianist . moment arrives for
harris to join in . harris takes no notice of it . nervous pianist commences prelude over
again , and harris , commencing singing at the same time , dashes off the first two lines
of the first lord's song out of pinafore . nervous pianist tries to push on with prelude ,
gives it up , and tries to follow harris with accompaniment to judge's song out of trial
by jury , finds that doesn't answer , and tries to recollect what he is doing , and where
he is , feels his mind giving way , and stops short . harris with kindly encouragement :
it's all right . you're doing it very well , indeed -- go on . nervous pianist : i'm
afraid there's a mistake somewhere . what are you singing ? harris promptly : why the
judge's song out of trial by jury . don't you know it ? some friend of harris's from the
back of the room : no , you're not , you chuckle-head , you're singing the admiral's song
from pinafore . long argument between harris and harris's friend as to what harris is
really singing . friend finally suggests that it doesn't matter what harris is singing so
long as harris gets on and sings it , and harris , with an evident sense of injustice
rankling inside him , requests pianist to begin again . pianist , thereupon , starts
prelude to the admiral's song , and harris , seizing what he considers to be a favourable
opening in the music , begins . harris : 'when i was young and called to the bar . '
general roar of laughter , taken by harris as a compliment . pianist , thinking of his
wife and family , gives up the unequal contest and retires ; his place being taken by a
stronger-nerved man . the new pianist cheerily : now then , old man , you start off , and
i'll follow . we won't bother about any prelude . harris upon whom the explanation of
matters has slowly dawned -- laughing : by jove ! i beg your pardon . of course -- i've
been mixing up the two songs . it was jenkins confused me , you know . now then . singing

53
; his voice appearing to come from the cellar , and suggesting the first low warnings of
an approaching earthquake . 'when i was young i served a term as office-boy to an
attorney's firm . ' aside to pianist : it is too low , old man ; we'll have that over
again , if you don't mind . sings first two lines over again , in a high falsetto this
time . great surprise on the part of the audience . nervous old lady near the fire begins
to cry , and has to be led out . harris continuing : 'i swept the windows and i swept the
door , and i -- ' no -- no , i cleaned the windows of the big front door . and i polished
up the floor -- no , dash it -- i beg your pardon -- funny thing , i can't think of that
line . and i -- and i -- oh , well , we'll get on to the chorus , and chance it sings :
'and i diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-de , till now i am the ruler of the
queen's navee . ' now then , chorus -- it is the last two lines repeated , you know .
general chorus : and he diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-diddle-dee'd , till now he is
the ruler of the queen's navee . and harris never sees what an ass he is making of himself
, and how he is annoying a lot of people who never did him any harm . he honestly imagines
that he has given them a treat , and says he will sing another comic song after supper .
speaking of comic songs and parties , reminds me of a rather curious incident at which i
once assisted ; which , as it throws much light upon the inner mental working of human
nature in general , ought , i think , to be recorded in these pages . we were a
fashionable and highly cultured party . we had on our best clothes , and we talked pretty
, and were very happy -- all except two young fellows , students , just returned from
germany , commonplace young men , who seemed restless and uncomfortable , as if they found
the proceedings slow . the truth was , we were too clever for them . our brilliant but
polished conversation , and our high-class tastes , were beyond them . they were out of
place , among us . they never ought to have been there at all . everybody agreed upon that
, later on . we played morceaux from the old german masters . we discussed philosophy and
ethics . we flirted with graceful dignity . we were even humorous -- in a high-class way .
somebody recited a french poem after supper , and we said it was beautiful ; and then a
lady sang a sentimental ballad in spanish , and it made one or two of us weep -- it was so

54
pathetic . and then those two young men got up , and asked us if we had ever heard herr
slossenn boschen who had just arrived , and was then down in the supper-room sing his
great german comic song . none of us had heard it , that we could remember . the young men
said it was the funniest song that had ever been written , and that , if we liked , they
would get herr slossenn boschen , whom they knew very well , to sing it . they said it was
so funny that , when herr slossenn boschen had sung it once before the german emperor , he
the german emperor had had to be carried off to bed . they said nobody could sing it like
herr slossenn boschen ; he was so intensely serious all through it that you might fancy he
was reciting a tragedy , and that , of course , made it all the funnier . they said he
never once suggested by his tone or manner that he was singing anything funny -- that
would spoil it . it was his air of seriousness , almost of pathos , that made it so
irresistibly amusing . we said we yearned to hear it , that we wanted a good laugh ; and
they went downstairs , and fetched herr slossenn boschen . he appeared to be quite pleased
to sing it , for he came up at once , and sat down to the piano without another word . oh
, it will amuse you . you will laugh , whispered the two young men , as they passed
through the room , and took up an unobtrusive position behind the professor's back . herr
slossenn boschen accompanied himself . the prelude did not suggest a comic song exactly .
it was a weird , soulful air . it quite made one's flesh creep ; but we murmured to one
another that it was the german method , and prepared to enjoy it . i don't understand
german myself . i learned it at school , but forgot every word of it two years after i had
left , and have felt much better ever since . still , i did not want the people there to
guess my ignorance ; so i hit upon what i thought to be rather a good idea . i kept my eye
on the two young students , and followed them . when they tittered , i tittered ; when
they roared , i roared ; and i also threw in a little snigger all by myself now and then ,
as if i had seen a bit of humour that had escaped the others . i considered this
particularly artful on my part . i noticed , as the song progressed , that a good many
other people seemed to have their eye fixed on the two young men , as well as myself .
these other people also tittered when the young men tittered , and roared when the young

55
men roared ; and , as the two young men tittered and roared and exploded with laughter
pretty continuously all through the song , it went exceedingly well . and yet that german
professor did not seem happy . at first , when we began to laugh , the expression of his
face was one of intense surprise , as if laughter were the very last thing he had expected
to be greeted with . we thought this very funny : we said his earnest manner was half the
humour . the slightest hint on his part that he knew how funny he was would have
completely ruined it all . as we continued to laugh , his surprise gave way to an air of
annoyance and indignation , and he scowled fiercely round upon us all except upon the two
young men who , being behind him , he could not see . that sent us into convulsions . we
told each other that it would be the death of us , this thing . the words alone , we said
, were enough to send us into fits , but added to his mock seriousness -- oh , it was too
much ! in the last verse , he surpassed himself . he glowered round upon us with a look of
such concentrated ferocity that , but for our being forewarned as to the german method of
comic singing , we should have been nervous ; and he threw such a wailing note of agony
into the weird music that , if we had not known it was a funny song , we might have wept .
he finished amid a perfect shriek of laughter . we said it was the funniest thing we had
ever heard in all our lives . we said how strange it was that , in the face of things like
these , there should be a popular notion that the germans hadn't any sense of humour . and
we asked the professor why he didn't translate the song into english , so that the common
people could understand it , and hear what a real comic song was like . then herr slossenn
boschen got up , and went on awful . he swore at us in german which i should judge to be a
singularly effective language for that purpose , and he danced , and shook his fists , and
called us all the english he knew . he said he had never been so insulted in all his life
. it appeared that the song was not a comic song at all . it was about a young girl who
lived in the hartz mountains , and who had given up her life to save her lover's soul ;
and he died , and met her spirit in the air ; and then , in the last verse , he jilted her
spirit , and went on with another spirit -- i'm not quite sure of the details , but it was
something very sad , i know . herr boschen said he had sung it once before the german

56
emperor , and he the german emperor had sobbed like a little child . he herr boschen said
it was generally acknowledged to be one of the most tragic and pathetic songs in the
german language . it was a trying situation for us -- very trying . there seemed to be no
answer . we looked around for the two young men who had done this thing , but they had
left the house in an unostentatious manner immediately after the end of the song . that
was the end of that party . i never saw a party break up so quietly , and with so little
fuss . we never said good-night even to one another . we came downstairs one at a time ,
walking softly , and keeping the shady side . we asked the servant for our hats and coats
in whispers , and opened the door for ourselves , and slipped out , and got round the
corner quickly , avoiding each other as much as possible . i have never taken much
interest in german songs since then . we reached sunbury lock at half-past three . the
river is sweetly pretty just there before you come to the gates , and the backwater is
charming ; but don't attempt to row up it . i tried to do so once . i was sculling , and
asked the fellows who were steering if they thought it could be done , and they said , oh
, yes , they thought so , if i pulled hard . we were just under the little foot-bridge
that crosses it between the two weirs , when they said this , and i bent down over the
sculls , and set myself up , and pulled . i pulled splendidly . i got well into a steady
rhythmical swing . i put my arms , and my legs , and my back into it . i set myself a good
, quick , dashing stroke , and worked in really grand style . my two friends said it was a
pleasure to watch me . at the end of five minutes , i thought we ought to be pretty near
the weir , and i looked up . we were under the bridge , in exactly the same spot that we
were when i began , and there were those two idiots , injuring themselves by violent
laughing . i had been grinding away like mad to keep that boat stuck still under that
bridge . i let other people pull up backwaters against strong streams now . we sculled up
to walton , a rather large place for a riverside town . as with all riverside places ,
only the tiniest corner of it comes down to the water , so that from the boat you might
fancy it was a village of some half-dozen houses , all told . windsor and abingdon are the
only towns between london and oxford that you can really see anything of from the stream .

57
all the others hide round corners , and merely peep at the river down one street : my
thanks to them for being so considerate , and leaving the river-banks to woods and fields
and water-works . even reading , though it does its best to spoil and sully and make
hideous as much of the river as it can reach , is good-natured enough to keep its ugly
face a good deal out of sight . caesar , of course , had a little place at walton -- a
camp , or an entrenchment , or something of that sort . caesar was a regular up-river man
. also queen elizabeth , she was there , too . you can never get away from that woman , go
where you will . cromwell and bradshaw not the guide man , but the king charles's head man
likewise sojourned here . they must have been quite a pleasant little party , altogether .
there is an iron scold's bridle in walton church . they used these things in ancient days
for curbing women's tongues . they have given up the attempt now . i suppose iron was
getting scarce , and nothing else would be strong enough . there are also tombs of note in
the church , and i was afraid i should never get harris past them ; but he didn't seem to
think of them , and we went on . above the bridge the river winds tremendously . this
makes it look picturesque ; but it irritates you from a towing or sculling point of view ,
and causes argument between the man who is pulling and the man who is steering . you pass
oatlands park on the right bank here . it is a famous old place . henry viii . stole it
from some one or the other , i forget whom now , and lived in it . there is a grotto in
the park which you can see for a fee , and which is supposed to be very wonderful ; but i
cannot see much in it myself . the late duchess of york , who lived at oatlands , was very
fond of dogs , and kept an immense number . she had a special graveyard made , in which to
bury them when they died , and there they lie , about fifty of them , with a tombstone
over each , and an epitaph inscribed thereon . well , i dare say they deserve it quite as
much as the average christian does . at corway stakes -- the first bend above walton
bridge -- was fought a battle between caesar and cassivelaunus . cassivelaunus had
prepared the river for caesar , by planting it full of stakes and had , no doubt , put up
a notice-board . but caesar crossed in spite of this . you couldn't choke caesar off that
river . he is the sort of man we want round the backwaters now . halliford and shepperton

58
are both pretty little spots where they touch the river ; but there is nothing remarkable
about either of them . there is a tomb in shepperton churchyard , however , with a poem on
it , and i was nervous lest harris should want to get out and fool round it . i saw him
fix a longing eye on the landing-stage as we drew near it , so i managed , by an adroit
movement , to jerk his cap into the water , and in the excitement of recovering that , and
his indignation at my clumsiness , he forgot all about his beloved graves . at weybridge ,
the wey a pretty little stream , navigable for small boats up to guildford , and one which
i have always been making up my mind to explore , and never have , the bourne , and the
basingstoke canal all enter the thames together . the lock is just opposite the town , and
the first thing that we saw , when we came in view of it , was george's blazer on one of
the lock gates , closer inspection showing that george was inside it . montmorency set up
a furious barking , i shrieked , harris roared ; george waved his hat , and yelled back .
the lock-keeper rushed out with a drag , under the impression that somebody had fallen
into the lock , and appeared annoyed at finding that no one had . george had rather a
curious oilskin-covered parcel in his hand . it was round and flat at one end , with a
long straight handle sticking out of it . what's that ? said harris -- a frying-pan ? no ,
said george , with a strange , wild look glittering in his eyes ; they are all the rage
this season ; everybody has got them up the river . it's a banjo . i never knew you played
the banjo ! cried harris and i , in one breath . not exactly , replied george : but it's
very easy , they tell me ; and i've got the instruction book ! we made george work , now
we had got him . he did not want to work , of course ; that goes without saying . he had
had a hard time in the city , so he explained . harris , who is callous in his nature ,
and not prone to pity , said : ah ! and now you are going to have a hard time on the river
for a change ; change is good for everyone . out you get ! he could not in conscience --
not even george's conscience -- object , though he did suggest that , perhaps , it would
be better for him to stop in the boat , and get tea ready , while harris and i towed ,
because getting tea was such a worrying work , and harris and i looked tired . the only
reply we made to this , however , was to pass him over the tow-line , and he took it , and

59
stepped out . there is something very strange and unaccountable about a tow-line . you
roll it up with as much patience and care as you would take to fold up a new pair of
trousers , and five minutes afterwards , when you pick it up , it is one ghastly ,
soul-revolting tangle . i do not wish to be insulting , but i firmly believe that if you
took an average tow-line , and stretched it out straight across the middle of a field ,
and then turned your back on it for thirty seconds , that , when you looked round again ,
you would find that it had got itself altogether in a heap in the middle of the field ,
and had twisted itself up , and tied itself into knots , and lost its two ends , and
become all loops ; and it would take you a good half-hour , sitting down there on the
grass and swearing all the while , to disentangle it again . that is my opinion of
tow-lines in general . of course , there may be honourable exceptions ; i do not say that
there are not . there may be tow-lines that are a credit to their profession --
conscientious , respectable tow-lines -- tow-lines that do not imagine they are
crochet-work , and try to knit themselves up into antimacassars the instant they are left
to themselves . i say there may be such tow-lines ; i sincerely hope there are . but i
have not met with them . this tow-line i had taken in myself just before we had got to the
lock . i would not let harris touch it , because he is careless . i had looped it round
slowly and cautiously , and tied it up in the middle , and folded it in two , and laid it
down gently at the bottom of the boat . harris had lifted it up scientifically , and had
put it into george's hand . george had taken it firmly , and held it away from him , and
had begun to unravel it as if he were taking the swaddling clothes off a new-born infant ;
and , before he had unwound a dozen yards , the thing was more like a badly-made door-mat
than anything else . it is always the same , and the same sort of thing always goes on in
connection with it . the man on the bank , who is trying to disentangle it , thinks all
the fault lies with the man who rolled it up ; and when a man up the river thinks a thing
, he says it . what have you been trying to do with it , make a fishing-net of it ? you've
made a nice mess you have ; why couldn't you wind it up properly , you silly dummy ? he
grunts from time to time as he struggles wildly with it , and lays it out flat on the

60
CHAPTER 6

tow-path , and runs round and round it , trying to find the end . on the other hand , the
man who wound it up thinks the whole cause of the muddle rests with the man who is trying
to unwind it . it was all right when you took it ! he exclaims indignantly . why don't you
think what you are doing ? you go about things in such a slap-dash style . you'd get a
scaffolding pole entangled you would ! and they feel so angry with one another that they
would like to hang each other with the thing . ten minutes go by , and the first man gives
a yell and goes mad , and dances on the rope , and tries to pull it straight by seizing
hold of the first piece that comes to his hand and hauling at it . of course , this only
gets it into a tighter tangle than ever . then the second man climbs out of the boat and
comes to help him , and they get in each other's way , and hinder one another . they both
get hold of the same bit of line , and pull at it in opposite directions , and wonder
where it is caught . in the end , they do get it clear , and then turn round and find that
the boat has drifted off , and is making straight for the weir . this really happened once
to my own knowledge . it was up by boveney , one rather windy morning . we were pulling
down stream , and , as we came round the bend , we noticed a couple of men on the bank .
they were looking at each other with as bewildered and helplessly miserable expression as
i have ever witnessed on any human countenance before or since , and they held a long
tow-line between them . it was clear that something had happened , so we eased up and
asked them what was the matter . why , our boat's gone off ! they replied in an indignant
tone . we just got out to disentangle the tow-line , and when we looked round , it was
gone ! and they seemed hurt at what they evidently regarded as a mean and ungrateful act
on the part of the boat . we found the truant for them half a mile further down , held by
some rushes , and we brought it back to them . i bet they did not give that boat another
chance for a week . i shall never forget the picture of those two men walking up and down
the bank with a tow-line , looking for their boat . one sees a good many funny incidents
up the river in connection with towing . one of the most common is the sight of a couple

61
of towers , walking briskly along , deep in an animated discussion , while the man in the
boat , a hundred yards behind them , is vainly shrieking to them to stop , and making
frantic signs of distress with a scull . something has gone wrong ; the rudder has come
off , or the boat-hook has slipped overboard , or his hat has dropped into the water and
is floating rapidly down stream . he calls to them to stop , quite gently and politely at
first . hi ! stop a minute , will you ? he shouts cheerily . i've dropped my hat
over-board . then : hi ! tom -- dick ! can't you hear ? not quite so affably this time .
then : hi ! confound you , you dunder-headed idiots ! hi ! stop ! oh you -- ! after that
he springs up , and dances about , and roars himself red in the face , and curses
everything he knows . and the small boys on the bank stop and jeer at him , and pitch
stones at him as he is pulled along past them , at the rate of four miles an hour , and
can't get out . much of this sort of trouble would be saved if those who are towing would
keep remembering that they are towing , and give a pretty frequent look round to see how
their man is getting on . it is best to let one person tow . when two are doing it , they
get chattering , and forget , and the boat itself , offering , as it does , but little
resistance , is of no real service in reminding them of the fact . as an example of how
utterly oblivious a pair of towers can be to their work , george told us , later on in the
evening , when we were discussing the subject after supper , of a very curious instance .
he and three other men , so he said , were sculling a very heavily laden boat up from
maidenhead one evening , and a little above cookham lock they noticed a fellow and a girl
, walking along the towpath , both deep in an apparently interesting and absorbing
conversation . they were carrying a boat-hook between them , and , attached to the
boat-hook was a tow-line , which trailed behind them , its end in the water . no boat was
near , no boat was in sight . there must have been a boat attached to that tow-line at
some time or other , that was certain ; but what had become of it , what ghastly fate had
overtaken it , and those who had been left in it , was buried in mystery . whatever the
accident may have been , however , it had in no way disturbed the young lady and gentleman
, who were towing . they had the boat-hook and they had the line , and that seemed to be

62
all that they thought necessary to their work . george was about to call out and wake them
up , but , at that moment , a bright idea flashed across him , and he didn't . he got the
hitcher instead , and reached over , and drew in the end of the tow-line ; and they made a
loop in it , and put it over their mast , and then they tidied up the sculls , and went
and sat down in the stern , and lit their pipes . and that young man and young woman towed
those four hulking chaps and a heavy boat up to marlow . george said he never saw so much
thoughtful sadness concentrated into one glance before , as when , at the lock , that
young couple grasped the idea that , for the last two miles , they had been towing the
wrong boat . george fancied that , if it had not been for the restraining influence of the
sweet woman at his side , the young man might have given way to violent language . the
maiden was the first to recover from her surprise , and , when she did , she clasped her
hands , and said , wildly : oh , henry , then where is auntie ? did they ever recover the
old lady ? asked harris . george replied he did not know . another example of the
dangerous want of sympathy between tower and towed was witnessed by george and myself once
up near walton . it was where the tow-path shelves gently down into the water , and we
were camping on the opposite bank , noticing things in general . by-and-by a small boat
came in sight , towed through the water at a tremendous pace by a powerful barge horse ,
on which sat a very small boy . scattered about the boat , in dreamy and reposeful
attitudes , lay five fellows , the man who was steering having a particularly restful
appearance . i should like to see him pull the wrong line , murmured george , as they
passed . and at that precise moment the man did it , and the boat rushed up the bank with
a noise like the ripping up of forty thousand linen sheets . two men , a hamper , and
three oars immediately left the boat on the larboard side , and reclined on the bank , and
one and a half moments afterwards , two other men disembarked from the starboard , and sat
down among boat-hooks and sails and carpet-bags and bottles . the last man went on twenty
yards further , and then got out on his head . this seemed to sort of lighten the boat ,
and it went on much easier , the small boy shouting at the top of his voice , and urging
his steed into a gallop . the fellows sat up and stared at one another . it was some

63
seconds before they realised what had happened to them , but , when they did , they began
to shout lustily for the boy to stop . he , however , was too much occupied with the horse
to hear them , and we watched them , flying after him , until the distance hid them from
view . i cannot say i was sorry at their mishap . indeed , i only wish that all the young
fools who have their boats towed in this fashion -- and plenty do -- could meet with
similar misfortunes . besides the risk they run themselves , they become a danger and an
annoyance to every other boat they pass . going at the pace they do , it is impossible for
them to get out of anybody else's way , or for anybody else to get out of theirs . their
line gets hitched across your mast , and overturns you , or it catches somebody in the
boat , and either throws them into the water , or cuts their face open . the best plan is
to stand your ground , and be prepared to keep them off with the butt-end of a mast . of
all experiences in connection with towing , the most exciting is being towed by girls . it
is a sensation that nobody ought to miss . it takes three girls to tow always ; two hold
the rope , and the other one runs round and round , and giggles . they generally begin by
getting themselves tied up . they get the line round their legs , and have to sit down on
the path and undo each other , and then they twist it round their necks , and are nearly
strangled . they fix it straight , however , at last , and start off at a run , pulling
the boat along at quite a dangerous pace . at the end of a hundred yards they are
naturally breathless , and suddenly stop , and all sit down on the grass and laugh , and
your boat drifts out to mid-stream and turns round , before you know what has happened ,
or can get hold of a scull . then they stand up , and are surprised . oh , look ! they say
; he's gone right out into the middle . they pull on pretty steadily for a bit , after
this , and then it all at once occurs to one of them that she will pin up her frock , and
they ease up for the purpose , and the boat runs aground . you jump up , and push it off ,
and you shout to them not to stop . yes . what's the matter ? they shout back . don't stop
, you roar . don't what ? don't stop -- go on -- go on ! go back , emily , and see what it
is they want , says one ; and emily comes back , and asks what it is . what do you want ?
she says ; anything happened ? no , you reply , it's all right ; only go on , you know --

64
don't stop . why not ? why , we can't steer , if you keep stopping . you must keep some
way on the boat . keep some what ? some way -- you must keep the boat moving . oh , all
right , i'll tell 'em . are we doing it all right ? oh , yes , very nicely , indeed , only
don't stop . it doesn't seem difficult at all . i thought it was so hard . oh , no , it's
simple enough . you want to keep on steady at it , that's all . i see . give me out my red
shawl , it's under the cushion . you find the shawl , and hand it out , and by this time
another one has come back and thinks she will have hers too , and they take mary's on
chance , and mary does not want it , so they bring it back and have a pocket-comb instead
. it is about twenty minutes before they get off again , and , at the next corner , they
see a cow , and you have to leave the boat to chivy the cow out of their way . there is
never a dull moment in the boat while girls are towing it . george got the line right
after a while , and towed us steadily on to penton hook . there we discussed the important
question of camping . we had decided to sleep on board that night , and we had either to
lay up just about there , or go on past staines . it seemed early to think about shutting
up then , however , with the sun still in the heavens , and we settled to push straight on
for runnymead , three and a half miles further , a quiet wooded part of the river , and
where there is good shelter . we all wished , however , afterward that we had stopped at
penton hook . three or four miles up stream is a trifle , early in the morning , but it is
a weary pull at the end of a long day . you take no interest in the scenery during these
last few miles . you do not chat and laugh . every half-mile you cover seems like two .
you can hardly believe you are only where you are , and you are convinced that the map
must be wrong ; and , when you have trudged along for what seems to you at least ten miles
, and still the lock is not in sight , you begin to seriously fear that somebody must have
sneaked it , and run off with it . i remember being terribly upset once up the river in a
figurative sense , i mean . i was out with a young lady -- cousin on my mother's side --
and we were pulling down to goring . it was rather late , and we were anxious to get in --
at least she was anxious to get in . it was half-past six when we reached benson's lock ,
and dusk was drawing on , and she began to get excited then . she said she must be in to

65
supper . i said it was a thing i felt i wanted to be in at , too ; and i drew out a map i
had with me to see exactly how far it was . i saw it was just a mile and a half to the
next lock -- wallingford -- and five on from there to cleeve . oh , it's all right ! i
said . we'll be through the next lock before seven , and then there is only one more ; and
i settled down and pulled steadily away . we passed the bridge , and soon after that i
asked if she saw the lock . she said no , she did not see any lock ; and i said , oh ! and
pulled on . another five minutes went by , and then i asked her to look again . no , she
said ; i can't see any signs of a lock . you -- you are sure you know a lock , when you do
see one ? i asked hesitatingly , not wishing to offend her . the question did offend her ,
however , and she suggested that i had better look for myself ; so i laid down the sculls
, and took a view . the river stretched out straight before us in the twilight for about a
mile ; not a ghost of a lock was to be seen . you don't think we have lost our way , do
you ? asked my companion . i did not see how that was possible ; though , as i suggested ,
we might have somehow got into the weir stream , and be making for the falls . this idea
did not comfort her in the least , and she began to cry . she said we should both be
drowned , and that it was a judgment on her for coming out with me . it seemed an
excessive punishment , i thought ; but my cousin thought not , and hoped it would all soon
be over . i tried to reassure her , and to make light of the whole affair . i said that
the fact evidently was that i was not rowing as fast as i fancied i was , but that we
should soon reach the lock now ; and i pulled on for another mile . then i began to get
nervous myself . i looked again at the map . there was wallingford lock , clearly marked ,
a mile and a half below benson's . it was a good , reliable map ; and , besides , i
recollected the lock myself . i had been through it twice . where were we ? what had
happened to us ? i began to think it must be all a dream , and that i was really asleep in
bed , and should wake up in a minute , and be told it was past ten . i asked my cousin if
she thought it could be a dream , and she replied that she was just about to ask me the
same question ; and then we both wondered if we were both asleep , and if so , who was the
real one that was dreaming , and who was the one that was only a dream ; it got quite

66
interesting . i still went on pulling , however , and still no lock came in sight , and
the river grew more and more gloomy and mysterious under the gathering shadows of night ,
and things seemed to be getting weird and uncanny . i thought of hobgoblins and banshees ,
and will-o'-the-wisps , and those wicked girls who sit up all night on rocks , and lure
people into whirl-pools and things ; and i wished i had been a better man , and knew more
hymns ; and in the middle of these reflections i heard the blessed strains of he's got 'em
on , played , badly , on a concertina , and knew that we were saved . i do not admire the
tones of a concertina , as a rule ; but , oh ! how beautiful the music seemed to us both
then -- far , far more beautiful than the voice of orpheus or the lute of apollo , or
anything of that sort could have sounded . heavenly melody , in our then state of mind ,
would only have still further harrowed us . a soul-moving harmony , correctly performed ,
we should have taken as a spirit-warning , and have given up all hope . but about the
strains of he's got 'em on , jerked spasmodically , and with involuntary variations , out
of a wheezy accordion , there was something singularly human and reassuring . the sweet
sounds drew nearer , and soon the boat from which they were worked lay alongside us . it
contained a party of provincial 'arrys and 'arriets , out for a moonlight sail . there was
not any moon , but that was not their fault . i never saw more attractive , lovable people
in all my life . i hailed them , and asked if they could tell me the way to wallingford
lock ; and i explained that i had been looking for it for the last two hours . wallingford
lock ! they answered . lor' love you , sir , that's been done away with for over a year .
there ain't no wallingford lock now , sir . you're close to cleeve now . blow me tight if
'ere ain't a gentleman been looking for wallingford lock , bill ! i had never thought of
that . i wanted to fall upon all their necks and bless them ; but the stream was running
too strong just there to allow of this , so i had to content myself with mere
cold-sounding words of gratitude . we thanked them over and over again , and we said it
was a lovely night , and we wished them a pleasant trip , and , i think , i invited them
all to come and spend a week with me , and my cousin said her mother would be so pleased
to see them . and we sang the soldiers' chorus out of faust , and got home in time for

67
supper , after all . harris and i began to think that bell weir lock must have been done
away with after the same manner . george had towed us up to staines , and we had taken the
boat from there , and it seemed that we were dragging fifty tons after us , and were
walking forty miles . it was half-past seven when we were through , and we all got in ,
and sculled up close to the left bank , looking out for a spot to haul up in . we had
originally intended to go on to magna charta island , a sweetly pretty part of the river ,
where it winds through a soft , green valley , and to camp in one of the many picturesque
inlets to be found round that tiny shore . but , somehow , we did not feel that we yearned
for the picturesque nearly so much now as we had earlier in the day . a bit of water
between a coal-barge and a gas-works would have quite satisfied us for that night . we did
not want scenery . we wanted to have our supper and go to bed . however , we did pull up
to the point -- picnic point , it is called -- and dropped into a very pleasant nook under
a great elm-tree , to the spreading roots of which we fastened the boat . then we thought
we were going to have supper we had dispensed with tea , so as to save time , but george
said no ; that we had better get the canvas up first , before it got quite dark , and
while we could see what we were doing . then , he said , all our work would be done , and
we could sit down to eat with an easy mind . that canvas wanted more putting up than i
think any of us had bargained for . it looked so simple in the abstract . you took five
iron arches , like gigantic croquet hoops , and fitted them up over the boat , and then
stretched the canvas over them , and fastened it down : it would take quite ten minutes ,
we thought . that was an under-estimate . we took up the hoops , and began to drop them
into the sockets placed for them . you would not imagine this to be dangerous work ; but ,
looking back now , the wonder to me is that any of us are alive to tell the tale . they
were not hoops , they were demons . first they would not fit into their sockets at all ,
and we had to jump on them , and kick them , and hammer at them with the boat-hook ; and ,
when they were in , it turned out that they were the wrong hoops for those particular
sockets , and they had to come out again . but they would not come out , until two of us
had gone and struggled with them for five minutes , when they would jump up suddenly , and

68
try and throw us into the water and drown us . they had hinges in the middle , and , when
we were not looking , they nipped us with these hinges in delicate parts of the body ; and
, while we were wrestling with one side of the hoop , and endeavouring to persuade it to
do its duty , the other side would come behind us in a cowardly manner , and hit us over
the head . we got them fixed at last , and then all that was to be done was to arrange the
covering over them . george unrolled it , and fastened one end over the nose of the boat .
harris stood in the middle to take it from george and roll it on to me , and i kept by the
stern to receive it . it was a long time coming down to me . george did his part all right
, but it was new work to harris , and he bungled it . how he managed it i do not know , he
could not explain himself ; but by some mysterious process or other he succeeded , after
ten minutes of superhuman effort , in getting himself completely rolled up in it . he was
so firmly wrapped round and tucked in and folded over , that he could not get out . he ,
of course , made frantic struggles for freedom -- the birthright of every englishman , --
and , in doing so i learned this afterwards , knocked over george ; and then george ,
swearing at harris , began to struggle too , and got himself entangled and rolled up . i
knew nothing about all this at the time . i did not understand the business at all myself
. i had been told to stand where i was , and wait till the canvas came to me , and
montmorency and i stood there and waited , both as good as gold . we could see the canvas
being violently jerked and tossed about , pretty considerably ; but we supposed this was
part of the method , and did not interfere . we also heard much smothered language coming
from underneath it , and we guessed that they were finding the job rather troublesome ,
and concluded that we would wait until things had got a little simpler before we joined in
. we waited some time , but matters seemed to get only more and more involved , until , at
last , george's head came wriggling out over the side of the boat , and spoke up . it said
: give us a hand here , can't you , you cuckoo ; standing there like a stuffed mummy ,
when you see we are both being suffocated , you dummy ! i never could withstand an appeal
for help , so i went and undid them ; not before it was time , either , for harris was
nearly black in the face . it took us half an hour's hard labour , after that , before it

69
was properly up , and then we cleared the decks , and got out supper . we put the kettle
on to boil , up in the nose of the boat , and went down to the stern and pretended to take
no notice of it , but set to work to get the other things out . that is the only way to
get a kettle to boil up the river . if it sees that you are waiting for it and are anxious
, it will never even sing . you have to go away and begin your meal , as if you were not
going to have any tea at all . you must not even look round at it . then you will soon
hear it sputtering away , mad to be made into tea . it is a good plan , too , if you are
in a great hurry , to talk very loudly to each other about how you don't need any tea ,
and are not going to have any . you get near the kettle , so that it can overhear you ,
and then you shout out , i don't want any tea ; do you , george ? to which george shouts
back , oh , no , i don't like tea ; we'll have lemonade instead -- tea's so indigestible .
upon which the kettle boils over , and puts the stove out . we adopted this harmless bit
of trickery , and the result was that , by the time everything else was ready , the tea
was waiting . then we lit the lantern , and squatted down to supper . we wanted that
supper . for five-and-thirty minutes not a sound was heard throughout the length and
breadth of that boat , save the clank of cutlery and crockery , and the steady grinding of
four sets of molars . at the end of five-and-thirty minutes , harris said , ah ! and took
his left leg out from under him and put his right one there instead . five minutes
afterwards , george said , ah ! too , and threw his plate out on the bank ; and , three
minutes later than that , montmorency gave the first sign of contentment he had exhibited
since we had started , and rolled over on his side , and spread his legs out ; and then i
said , ah ! and bent my head back , and bumped it against one of the hoops , but i did not
mind it . i did not even swear . how good one feels when one is full -- how satisfied with
ourselves and with the world ! people who have tried it , tell me that a clear conscience
makes you very happy and contented ; but a full stomach does the business quite as well ,
and is cheaper , and more easily obtained . one feels so forgiving and generous after a
substantial and well-digested meal -- so noble-minded , so kindly-hearted . it is very
strange , this domination of our intellect by our digestive organs . we cannot work , we

70
cannot think , unless our stomach wills so . it dictates to us our emotions , our passions
. after eggs and bacon , it says , work ! after beefsteak and porter , it says , sleep !
after a cup of tea two spoonsful for each cup , and don't let it stand more than three
minutes , it says to the brain , now , rise , and show your strength . be eloquent , and
deep , and tender ; see , with a clear eye , into nature and into life ; spread your white
wings of quivering thought , and soar , a god-like spirit , over the whirling world
beneath you , up through long lanes of flaming stars to the gates of eternity ! after hot
muffins , it says , be dull and soulless , like a beast of the field -- a brainless animal
, with listless eye , unlit by any ray of fancy , or of hope , or fear , or love , or life
. and after brandy , taken in sufficient quantity , it says , now , come , fool , grin and
tumble , that your fellow-men may laugh -- drivel in folly , and splutter in senseless
sounds , and show what a helpless ninny is poor man whose wit and will are drowned , like
kittens , side by side , in half an inch of alcohol . we are but the veriest , sorriest
slaves of our stomach . reach not after morality and righteousness , my friends ; watch
vigilantly your stomach , and diet it with care and judgment . then virtue and contentment
will come and reign within your heart , unsought by any effort of your own ; and you will
be a good citizen , a loving husband , and a tender father -- a noble , pious man . before
our supper , harris and george and i were quarrelsome and snappy and ill-tempered ; after
our supper , we sat and beamed on one another , and we beamed upon the dog , too . we
loved each other , we loved everybody . harris , in moving about , trod on george's corn .
had this happened before supper , george would have expressed wishes and desires
concerning harris's fate in this world and the next that would have made a thoughtful man
shudder . as it was , he said : steady , old man ; 'ware wheat . and harris , instead of
merely observing , in his most unpleasant tones , that a fellow could hardly help treading
on some bit of george's foot , if he had to move about at all within ten yards of where
george was sitting , suggesting that george never ought to come into an ordinary sized
boat with feet that length , and advising him to hang them over the side , as he would
have done before supper , now said : oh , i'm so sorry , old chap ; i hope i haven't hurt

71
you . and george said : not at all ; that it was his fault ; and harris said no , it was
his . it was quite pretty to hear them . we lit our pipes , and sat , looking out on the
quiet night , and talked . george said why could not we be always like this -- away from
the world , with its sin and temptation , leading sober , peaceful lives , and doing good
. i said it was the sort of thing i had often longed for myself ; and we discussed the
possibility of our going away , we four , to some handy , well-fitted desert island , and
living there in the woods . harris said that the danger about desert islands , as far as
he had heard , was that they were so damp : but george said no , not if properly drained .
and then we got on to drains , and that put george in mind of a very funny thing that
happened to his father once . he said his father was travelling with another fellow
through wales , and , one night , they stopped at a little inn , where there were some
other fellows , and they joined the other fellows , and spent the evening with them . they
had a very jolly evening , and sat up late , and , by the time they came to go to bed ,
they this was when george's father was a very young man were slightly jolly , too . they
george's father and george's father's friend were to sleep in the same room , but in
different beds . they took the candle , and went up . the candle lurched up against the
wall when they got into the room , and went out , and they had to undress and grope into
bed in the dark . this they did ; but , instead of getting into separate beds , as they
thought they were doing , they both climbed into the same one without knowing it -- one
getting in with his head at the top , and the other crawling in from the opposite side of
the compass , and lying with his feet on the pillow . there was silence for a moment , and
then george's father said : joe ! what's the matter , tom ? replied joe's voice from the
other end of the bed . why , there's a man in my bed , said george's father ; here's his
feet on my pillow . well , it's an extraordinary thing , tom , answered the other ; but
i'm blest if there isn't a man in my bed , too ! what are you going to do ? asked george's
father . well , i'm going to chuck him out , replied joe . so am i , said george's father
, valiantly . there was a brief struggle , followed by two heavy bumps on the floor , and
then a rather doleful voice said : i say , tom ! yes ! how have you got on ? well , to

72
CHAPTER 7

tell you the truth , my man's chucked me out . so's mine ! i say , i don't think much of
this inn , do you ? what was the name of that inn ? said harris . the pig and whistle ,
said george . why ? ah , no , then it isn't the same , replied harris . what do you mean ?
queried george . why it's so curious , murmured harris , but precisely that very same
thing happened to my father once at a country inn . i've often heard him tell the tale . i
thought it might have been the same inn . we turned in at ten that night , and i thought i
should sleep well , being tired ; but i didn't . as a rule , i undress and put my head on
the pillow , and then somebody bangs at the door , and says it is half-past eight : but ,
to-night , everything seemed against me ; the novelty of it all , the hardness of the boat
, the cramped position i was lying with my feet under one seat , and my head on another ,
the sound of the lapping water round the boat , and the wind among the branches , kept me
restless and disturbed . i did get to sleep for a few hours , and then some part of the
boat which seemed to have grown up in the night -- for it certainly was not there when we
started , and it had disappeared by the morning -- kept digging into my spine . i slept
through it for a while , dreaming that i had swallowed a sovereign , and that they were
cutting a hole in my back with a gimlet , so as to try and get it out . i thought it very
unkind of them , and i told them i would owe them the money , and they should have it at
the end of the month . but they would not hear of that , and said it would be much better
if they had it then , because otherwise the interest would accumulate so . i got quite
cross with them after a bit , and told them what i thought of them , and then they gave
the gimlet such an excruciating wrench that i woke up . the boat seemed stuffy , and my
head ached ; so i thought i would step out into the cool night-air . i slipped on what
clothes i could find about -- some of my own , and some of george's and harris's -- and
crept under the canvas on to the bank . it was a glorious night . the moon had sunk , and
left the quiet earth alone with the stars . it seemed as if , in the silence and the hush
, while we her children slept , they were talking with her , their sister -- conversing of

73
mighty mysteries in voices too vast and deep for childish human ears to catch the sound .
they awe us , these strange stars , so cold , so clear . we are as children whose small
feet have strayed into some dim-lit temple of the god they have been taught to worship but
know not ; and , standing where the echoing dome spans the long vista of the shadowy light
, glance up , half hoping , half afraid to see some awful vision hovering there . and yet
it seems so full of comfort and of strength , the night . in its great presence , our
small sorrows creep away , ashamed . the day has been so full of fret and care , and our
hearts have been so full of evil and of bitter thoughts , and the world has seemed so hard
and wrong to us . then night , like some great loving mother , gently lays her hand upon
our fevered head , and turns our little tear-stained faces up to hers , and smiles ; and ,
though she does not speak , we know what she would say , and lay our hot flushed cheek
against her bosom , and the pain is gone . sometimes , our pain is very deep and real ,
and we stand before her very silent , because there is no language for our pain , only a
moan . night's heart is full of pity for us : she cannot ease our aching ; she takes our
hand in hers , and the little world grows very small and very far away beneath us , and ,
borne on her dark wings , we pass for a moment into a mightier presence than her own , and
in the wondrous light of that great presence , all human life lies like a book before us ,
and we know that pain and sorrow are but the angels of god . only those who have worn the
crown of suffering can look upon that wondrous light ; and they , when they return , may
not speak of it , or tell the mystery they know . once upon a time , through a strange
country , there rode some goodly knights , and their path lay by a deep wood , where
tangled briars grew very thick and strong , and tore the flesh of them that lost their way
therein . and the leaves of the trees that grew in the wood were very dark and thick , so
that no ray of light came through the branches to lighten the gloom and sadness . and , as
they passed by that dark wood , one knight of those that rode , missing his comrades ,
wandered far away , and returned to them no more ; and they , sorely grieving , rode on
without him , mourning him as one dead . now , when they reached the fair castle towards
which they had been journeying , they stayed there many days , and made merry ; and one

74
night , as they sat in cheerful ease around the logs that burned in the great hall , and
drank a loving measure , there came the comrade they had lost , and greeted them . his
clothes were ragged , like a beggar's , and many sad wounds were on his sweet flesh , but
upon his face there shone a great radiance of deep joy . and they questioned him , asking
him what had befallen him : and he told them how in the dark wood he had lost his way ,
and had wandered many days and nights , till , torn and bleeding , he had lain him down to
die . then , when he was nigh unto death , lo ! through the savage gloom there came to him
a stately maiden , and took him by the hand and led him on through devious paths , unknown
to any man , until upon the darkness of the wood there dawned a light such as the light of
day was unto but as a little lamp unto the sun ; and , in that wondrous light , our
way-worn knight saw as in a dream a vision , and so glorious , so fair the vision seemed ,
that of his bleeding wounds he thought no more , but stood as one entranced , whose joy is
deep as is the sea , whereof no man can tell the depth . and the vision faded , and the
knight , kneeling upon the ground , thanked the good saint who into that sad wood had
strayed his steps , so he had seen the vision that lay there hid . and the name of the
dark forest was sorrow ; but of the vision that the good knight saw therein we may not
speak nor tell . i woke at six the next morning ; and found george awake too . we both
turned round , and tried to go to sleep again , but we could not . had there been any
particular reason why we should not have gone to sleep again , but have got up and dressed
then and there , we should have dropped off while we were looking at our watches , and
have slept till ten . as there was no earthly necessity for our getting up under another
two hours at the very least , and our getting up at that time was an utter absurdity , it
was only in keeping with the natural cussedness of things in general that we should both
feel that lying down for five minutes more would be death to us . george said that the
same kind of thing , only worse , had happened to him some eighteen months ago , when he
was lodging by himself in the house of a certain mrs . gippings . he said his watch went
wrong one evening , and stopped at a quarter-past eight . he did not know this at the time
because , for some reason or other , he forgot to wind it up when he went to bed an

75
unusual occurrence with him , and hung it up over his pillow without ever looking at the
thing . it was in the winter when this happened , very near the shortest day , and a week
of fog into the bargain , so the fact that it was still very dark when george woke in the
morning was no guide to him as to the time . he reached up , and hauled down his watch .
it was a quarter-past eight . angels and ministers of grace defend us ! exclaimed george ;
and here have i got to be in the city by nine . why didn't somebody call me ? oh , this is
a shame ! and he flung the watch down , and sprang out of bed , and had a cold bath , and
washed himself , and dressed himself , and shaved himself in cold water because there was
not time to wait for the hot , and then rushed and had another look at the watch . whether
the shaking it had received in being thrown down on the bed had started it , or how it was
, george could not say , but certain it was that from a quarter-past eight it had begun to
go , and now pointed to twenty minutes to nine . george snatched it up , and rushed
downstairs . in the sitting-room , all was dark and silent : there was no fire , no
breakfast . george said it was a wicked shame of mrs . g . , and he made up his mind to
tell her what he thought of her when he came home in the evening . then he dashed on his
great-coat and hat , and , seizing his umbrella , made for the front door . the door was
not even unbolted . george anathematized mrs . g . for a lazy old woman , and thought it
was very strange that people could not get up at a decent , respectable time , unlocked
and unbolted the door , and ran out . he ran hard for a quarter of a mile , and at the end
of that distance it began to be borne in upon him as a strange and curious thing that
there were so few people about , and that there were no shops open . it was certainly a
very dark and foggy morning , but still it seemed an unusual course to stop all business
on that account . he had to go to business : why should other people stop in bed merely
because it was dark and foggy ! at length he reached holborn . not a shutter was down !
not a bus was about ! there were three men in sight , one of whom was a policeman ; a
market-cart full of cabbages , and a dilapidated looking cab . george pulled out his watch
and looked at it : it was five minutes to nine ! he stood still and counted his pulse . he
stooped down and felt his legs . then , with his watch still in his hand , he went up to

76
the policeman , and asked him if he knew what the time was . what's the time ? said the
man , eyeing george up and down with evident suspicion ; why , if you listen you will hear
it strike . george listened , and a neighbouring clock immediately obliged . but it's only
gone three ! said george in an injured tone , when it had finished . well , and how many
did you want it to go ? replied the constable . why , nine , said george , showing his
watch . do you know where you live ? said the guardian of public order , severely . george
thought , and gave the address . oh ! that's where it is , is it ? replied the man ; well
, you take my advice and go there quietly , and take that watch of yours with you ; and
don't let's have any more of it . and george went home again , musing as he walked along ,
and let himself in . at first , when he got in , he determined to undress and go to bed
again ; but when he thought of the redressing and re-washing , and the having of another
bath , he determined he would not , but would sit up and go to sleep in the easy-chair .
but he could not get to sleep : he never felt more wakeful in his life ; so he lit the
lamp and got out the chess-board , and played himself a game of chess . but even that did
not enliven him : it seemed slow somehow ; so he gave chess up and tried to read . he did
not seem able to take any sort of interest in reading either , so he put on his coat again
and went out for a walk . it was horribly lonesome and dismal , and all the policemen he
met regarded him with undisguised suspicion , and turned their lanterns on him and
followed him about , and this had such an effect upon him at last that he began to feel as
if he really had done something , and he got to slinking down the by-streets and hiding in
dark doorways when he heard the regulation flip-flop approaching . of course , this
conduct made the force only more distrustful of him than ever , and they would come and
rout him out and ask him what he was doing there ; and when he answered , nothing , he had
merely come out for a stroll it was then four o'clock in the morning , they looked as
though they did not believe him , and two plain-clothes constables came home with him to
see if he really did live where he had said he did . they saw him go in with his key , and
then they took up a position opposite and watched the house . he thought he would light
the fire when he got inside , and make himself some breakfast , just to pass away the time

77
; but he did not seem able to handle anything from a scuttleful of coals to a teaspoon
without dropping it or falling over it , and making such a noise that he was in mortal
fear that it would wake mrs . g . up , and that she would think it was burglars and open
the window and call police ! and then these two detectives would rush in and handcuff him
, and march him off to the police-court . he was in a morbidly nervous state by this time
, and he pictured the trial , and his trying to explain the circumstances to the jury ,
and nobody believing him , and his being sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude , and
his mother dying of a broken heart . so he gave up trying to get breakfast , and wrapped
himself up in his overcoat and sat in the easy-chair till mrs . g came down at half-past
seven . he said he had never got up too early since that morning : it had been such a
warning to him . we had been sitting huddled up in our rugs while george had been telling
me this true story , and on his finishing it i set to work to wake up harris with a scull
. the third prod did it : and he turned over on the other side , and said he would be down
in a minute , and that he would have his lace-up boots . we soon let him know where he was
, however , by the aid of the hitcher , and he sat up suddenly , sending montmorency , who
had been sleeping the sleep of the just right on the middle of his chest , sprawling
across the boat . then we pulled up the canvas , and all four of us poked our heads out
over the off-side , and looked down at the water and shivered . the idea , overnight , had
been that we should get up early in the morning , fling off our rugs and shawls , and ,
throwing back the canvas , spring into the river with a joyous shout , and revel in a long
delicious swim . somehow , now the morning had come , the notion seemed less tempting .
the water looked damp and chilly : the wind felt cold . well , who's going to be first in
? said harris at last . there was no rush for precedence . george settled the matter so
far as he was concerned by retiring into the boat and pulling on his socks . montmorency
gave vent to an involuntary howl , as if merely thinking of the thing had given him the
horrors ; and harris said it would be so difficult to get into the boat again , and went
back and sorted out his trousers . i did not altogether like to give in , though i did not
relish the plunge . there might be snags about , or weeds , i thought . i meant to

78
compromise matters by going down to the edge and just throwing the water over myself ; so
i took a towel and crept out on the bank and wormed my way along on to the branch of a
tree that dipped down into the water . it was bitterly cold . the wind cut like a knife .
i thought i would not throw the water over myself after all . i would go back into the
boat and dress ; and i turned to do so ; and , as i turned , the silly branch gave way ,
and i and the towel went in together with a tremendous splash , and i was out mid-stream
with a gallon of thames water inside me before i knew what had happened . by jove ! old j
. 's gone in , i heard harris say , as i came blowing to the surface . i didn't think he'd
have the pluck to do it . did you ? is it all right ? sung out george . lovely , i
spluttered back . you are duffers not to come in . i wouldn't have missed this for worlds
. why won't you try it ? it only wants a little determination . but i could not persuade
them . rather an amusing thing happened while dressing that morning . i was very cold when
i got back into the boat , and , in my hurry to get my shirt on , i accidentally jerked it
into the water . it made me awfully wild , especially as george burst out laughing . i
could not see anything to laugh at , and i told george so , and he only laughed the more .
i never saw a man laugh so much . i quite lost my temper with him at last , and i pointed
out to him what a drivelling maniac of an imbecile idiot he was ; but he only roared the
louder . and then , just as i was landing the shirt , i noticed that it was not my shirt
at all , but george's , which i had mistaken for mine ; whereupon the humour of the thing
struck me for the first time , and i began to laugh . and the more i looked from george's
wet shirt to george , roaring with laughter , the more i was amused , and i laughed so
much that i had to let the shirt fall back into the water again . ar'n't you -- you --
going to get it out ? said george , between his shrieks . i could not answer him at all
for a while , i was laughing so , but , at last , between my peals i managed to jerk out :
it isn't my shirt -- it's yours ! i never saw a man's face change from lively to severe so
suddenly in all my life before . what ! he yelled , springing up . you silly cuckoo ! why
can't you be more careful what you're doing ? why the deuce don't you go and dress on the
bank ? you're not fit to be in a boat , you're not . gimme the hitcher . i tried to make

79
him see the fun of the thing , but he could not . george is very dense at seeing a joke
sometimes . harris proposed that we should have scrambled eggs for breakfast . he said he
would cook them . it seemed , from his account , that he was very good at doing scrambled
eggs . he often did them at picnics and when out on yachts . he was quite famous for them
. people who had once tasted his scrambled eggs , so we gathered from his conversation ,
never cared for any other food afterwards , but pined away and died when they could not
get them . it made our mouths water to hear him talk about the things , and we handed him
out the stove and the frying-pan and all the eggs that had not smashed and gone over
everything in the hamper , and begged him to begin . he had some trouble in breaking the
eggs -- or rather not so much trouble in breaking them exactly as in getting them into the
frying-pan when broken , and keeping them off his trousers , and preventing them from
running up his sleeve ; but he fixed some half-a-dozen into the pan at last , and then
squatted down by the side of the stove and chivied them about with a fork . it seemed
harassing work , so far as george and i could judge . whenever he went near the pan he
burned himself , and then he would drop everything and dance round the stove , flicking
his fingers about and cursing the things . indeed , every time george and i looked round
at him he was sure to be performing this feat . we thought at first that it was a
necessary part of the culinary arrangements . we did not know what scrambled eggs were ,
and we fancied that it must be some red indian or sandwich islands sort of dish that
required dances and incantations for its proper cooking . montmorency went and put his
nose over it once , and the fat spluttered up and scalded him , and then he began dancing
and cursing . altogether it was one of the most interesting and exciting operations i have
ever witnessed . george and i were both quite sorry when it was over . the result was not
altogether the success that harris had anticipated . there seemed so little to show for
the business . six eggs had gone into the frying-pan , and all that came out was a
teaspoonful of burnt and unappetizing looking mess . harris said it was the fault of the
frying-pan , and thought it would have gone better if we had had a fish-kettle and a
gas-stove ; and we decided not to attempt the dish again until we had those aids to

80
housekeeping by us . the sun had got more powerful by the time we had finished breakfast ,
and the wind had dropped , and it was as lovely a morning as one could desire . little was
in sight to remind us of the nineteenth century ; and , as we looked out upon the river in
the morning sunlight , we could almost fancy that the centuries between us and that
ever-to-be-famous june morning of 1215 had been drawn aside , and that we , english
yeomen's sons in homespun cloth , with dirk at belt , were waiting there to witness the
writing of that stupendous page of history , the meaning whereof was to be translated to
the common people some four hundred and odd years later by one oliver cromwell , who had
deeply studied it . it is a fine summer morning -- sunny , soft , and still . but through
the air there runs a thrill of coming stir . king john has slept at duncroft hall , and
all the day before the little town of staines has echoed to the clang of armed men , and
the clatter of great horses over its rough stones , and the shouts of captains , and the
grim oaths and surly jests of bearded bowmen , billmen , pikemen , and strange-speaking
foreign spearmen . gay-cloaked companies of knights and squires have ridden in , all
travel-stained and dusty . and all the evening long the timid townsmen's doors have had to
be quick opened to let in rough groups of soldiers , for whom there must be found both
board and lodging , and the best of both , or woe betide the house and all within ; for
the sword is judge and jury , plaintiff and executioner , in these tempestuous times , and
pays for what it takes by sparing those from whom it takes it , if it pleases it to do so
. round the camp-fire in the market-place gather still more of the barons' troops , and
eat and drink deep , and bellow forth roystering drinking songs , and gamble and quarrel
as the evening grows and deepens into night . the firelight sheds quaint shadows on their
piled-up arms and on their uncouth forms . the children of the town steal round to watch
them , wondering ; and brawny country wenches , laughing , draw near to bandy ale-house
jest and jibe with the swaggering troopers , so unlike the village swains , who , now
despised , stand apart behind , with vacant grins upon their broad , peering faces . and
out from the fields around , glitter the faint lights of more distant camps , as here some
great lord's followers lie mustered , and there false john's french mercenaries hover like

81
crouching wolves without the town . and so , with sentinel in each dark street , and
twinkling watch-fires on each height around , the night has worn away , and over this fair
valley of old thame has broken the morning of the great day that is to close so big with
the fate of ages yet unborn . ever since grey dawn , in the lower of the two islands ,
just above where we are standing , there has been great clamour , and the sound of many
workmen . the great pavilion brought there yester eve is being raised , and carpenters are
busy nailing tiers of seats , while 'prentices from london town are there with
many-coloured stuffs and silks and cloth of gold and silver . and now , lo ! down upon the
road that winds along the river's bank from staines there come towards us , laughing and
talking together in deep guttural bass , a half-a-score of stalwart halbert-men -- barons'
men , these -- and halt at a hundred yards or so above us , on the other bank , and lean
upon their arms , and wait . and so , from hour to hour , march up along the road ever
fresh groups and bands of armed men , their casques and breastplates flashing back the
long low lines of morning sunlight , until , as far as eye can reach , the way seems thick
with glittering steel and prancing steeds . and shouting horsemen are galloping from group
to group , and little banners are fluttering lazily in the warm breeze , and every now and
then there is a deeper stir as the ranks make way on either side , and some great baron on
his war-horse , with his guard of squires around him , passes along to take his station at
the head of his serfs and vassals . and up the slope of cooper's hill , just opposite ,
are gathered the wondering rustics and curious townsfolk , who have run from staines , and
none are quite sure what the bustle is about , but each one has a different version of the
great event that they have come to see ; and some say that much good to all the people
will come from this day's work ; but the old men shake their heads , for they have heard
such tales before . and all the river down to staines is dotted with small craft and boats
and tiny coracles -- which last are growing out of favour now , and are used only by the
poorer folk . over the rapids , where in after years trim bell weir lock will stand , they
have been forced or dragged by their sturdy rowers , and now are crowding up as near as
they dare come to the great covered barges , which lie in readiness to bear king john to

82
where the fateful charter waits his signing . it is noon , and we and all the people have
been waiting patient for many an hour , and the rumour has run round that slippery john
has again escaped from the barons' grasp , and has stolen away from duncroft hall with his
mercenaries at his heels , and will soon be doing other work than signing charters for his
people's liberty . not so ! this time the grip upon him has been one of iron , and he has
slid and wriggled in vain . far down the road a little cloud of dust has risen , and draws
nearer and grows larger , and the pattering of many hoofs grows louder , and in and out
between the scattered groups of drawn-up men , there pushes on its way a brilliant
cavalcade of gay-dressed lords and knights . and front and rear , and either flank , there
ride the yeomen of the barons , and in the midst king john . he rides to where the barges
lie in readiness , and the great barons step forth from their ranks to meet him . he
greets them with a smile and laugh , and pleasant honeyed words , as though it were some
feast in his honour to which he had been invited . but as he rises to dismount , he casts
one hurried glance from his own french mercenaries drawn up in the rear to the grim ranks
of the barons' men that hem him in . is it too late ? one fierce blow at the unsuspecting
horseman at his side , one cry to his french troops , one desperate charge upon the
unready lines before him , and these rebellious barons might rue the day they dared to
thwart his plans ! a bolder hand might have turned the game even at that point . had it
been a richard there ! the cup of liberty might have been dashed from england's lips , and
the taste of freedom held back for a hundred years . but the heart of king john sinks
before the stern faces of the english fighting men , and the arm of king john drops back
on to his rein , and he dismounts and takes his seat in the foremost barge . and the
barons follow in , with each mailed hand upon the sword-hilt , and the word is given to
let go . slowly the heavy , bright-decked barges leave the shore of runningmede . slowly
against the swift current they work their ponderous way , till , with a low grumble , they
grate against the bank of the little island that from this day will bear the name of magna
charta island . and king john has stepped upon the shore , and we wait in breathless
silence till a great shout cleaves the air , and the great cornerstone in england's temple

83
of liberty has , now we know , been firmly laid . i was sitting on the bank , conjuring up
this scene to myself , when george remarked that when i was quite rested , perhaps i would
not mind helping to wash up ; and , thus recalled from the days of the glorious past to
the prosaic present , with all its misery and sin , i slid down into the boat and cleaned
out the frying-pan with a stick of wood and a tuft of grass , polishing it up finally with
george's wet shirt . we went over to magna charta island , and had a look at the stone
which stands in the cottage there and on which the great charter is said to have been
signed ; though , as to whether it really was signed there , or , as some say , on the
other bank at runningmede , i decline to commit myself . as far as my own personal opinion
goes , however , i am inclined to give weight to the popular island theory . certainly ,
had i been one of the barons , at the time , i should have strongly urged upon my comrades
the advisability of our getting such a slippery customer as king john on to the island ,
where there was less chance of surprises and tricks . there are the ruins of an old priory
in the grounds of ankerwyke house , which is close to picnic point , and it was round
about the grounds of this old priory that henry viii . is said to have waited for and met
anne boleyn . he also used to meet her at hever castle in kent , and also somewhere near
st . albans . it must have been difficult for the people of england in those days to have
found a spot where these thoughtless young folk were not spooning . have you ever been in
a house where there are a couple courting ? it is most trying . you think you will go and
sit in the drawing-room , and you march off there . as you open the door , you hear a
noise as if somebody had suddenly recollected something , and , when you get in , emily is
over by the window , full of interest in the opposite side of the road , and your friend ,
john edward , is at the other end of the room with his whole soul held in thrall by
photographs of other people's relatives . oh ! you say , pausing at the door , i didn't
know anybody was here . oh ! didn't you ? says emily , coldly , in a tone which implies
that she does not believe you . you hang about for a bit , then you say : it's very dark .
why don't you light the gas ? john edward says , oh ! he hadn't noticed it ; and emily
says that papa does not like the gas lit in the afternoon . you tell them one or two items

84
CHAPTER 8

of news , and give them your views and opinions on the irish question ; but this does not
appear to interest them . all they remark on any subject is , oh ! is it ? did he ? yes ,
and you don't say so ! and , after ten minutes of such style of conversation , you edge up
to the door , and slip out , and are surprised to find that the door immediately closes
behind you , and shuts itself , without your having touched it . half an hour later , you
think you will try a pipe in the conservatory . the only chair in the place is occupied by
emily ; and john edward , if the language of clothes can be relied upon , has evidently
been sitting on the floor . they do not speak , but they give you a look that says all
that can be said in a civilised community ; and you back out promptly and shut the door
behind you . you are afraid to poke your nose into any room in the house now ; so , after
walking up and down the stairs for a while , you go and sit in your own bedroom . this
becomes uninteresting , however , after a time , and so you put on your hat and stroll out
into the garden . you walk down the path , and as you pass the summer-house you glance in
, and there are those two young idiots , huddled up into one corner of it ; and they see
you , and are evidently under the idea that , for some wicked purpose of your own , you
are following them about . why don't they have a special room for this sort of thing , and
make people keep to it ? you mutter ; and you rush back to the hall and get your umbrella
and go out . it must have been much like this when that foolish boy henry viii . was
courting his little anne . people in buckinghamshire would have come upon them
unexpectedly when they were mooning round windsor and wraysbury , and have exclaimed , oh
! you here ! and henry would have blushed and said , yes ; he'd just come over to see a
man ; and anne would have said , oh , i'm so glad to see you ! isn't it funny ? i've just
met mr . henry viii . in the lane , and he's going the same way i am . then those people
would have gone away and said to themselves : oh ! we'd better get out of here while this
billing and cooing is on . we'll go down to kent . and they would go to kent , and the
first thing they would see in kent , when they got there , would be henry and anne fooling

85
round hever castle . oh , drat this ! they would have said . here , let's go away . i
can't stand any more of it . let's go to st . albans -- nice quiet place , st . albans .
and when they reached st . albans , there would be that wretched couple , kissing under
the abbey walls . then these folks would go and be pirates until the marriage was over .
from picnic point to old windsor lock is a delightful bit of the river . a shady road ,
dotted here and there with dainty little cottages , runs by the bank up to the bells of
ouseley , a picturesque inn , as most up-river inns are , and a place where a very good
glass of ale may be drunk -- so harris says ; and on a matter of this kind you can take
harris's word . old windsor is a famous spot in its way . edward the confessor had a
palace here , and here the great earl godwin was proved guilty by the justice of that age
of having encompassed the death of the king's brother . earl godwin broke a piece of bread
and held it in his hand . if i am guilty , said the earl , may this bread choke me when i
eat it ! then he put the bread into his mouth and swallowed it , and it choked him , and
he died . after you pass old windsor , the river is somewhat uninteresting , and does not
become itself again until you are nearing boveney . george and i towed up past the home
park , which stretches along the right bank from albert to victoria bridge ; and as we
were passing datchet , george asked me if i remembered our first trip up the river , and
when we landed at datchet at ten o'clock at night , and wanted to go to bed . i answered
that i did remember it . it will be some time before i forget it . it was the saturday
before the august bank holiday . we were tired and hungry , we same three , and when we
got to datchet we took out the hamper , the two bags , and the rugs and coats , and such
like things , and started off to look for diggings . we passed a very pretty little hotel
, with clematis and creeper over the porch ; but there was no honeysuckle about it , and ,
for some reason or other , i had got my mind fixed on honeysuckle , and i said : oh ,
don't let's go in there ! let's go on a bit further , and see if there isn't one with
honeysuckle over it . so we went on till we came to another hotel . that was a very nice
hotel , too , and it had honey-suckle on it , round at the side ; but harris did not like
the look of a man who was leaning against the front door . he said he didn't look a nice

86
man at all , and he wore ugly boots : so we went on further . we went a goodish way
without coming across any more hotels , and then we met a man , and asked him to direct us
to a few . he said : why , you are coming away from them . you must turn right round and
go back , and then you will come to the stag . we said : oh , we had been there , and
didn't like it -- no honeysuckle over it . well , then , he said , there's the manor house
, just opposite . have you tried that ? harris replied that we did not want to go there --
didn't like the looks of a man who was stopping there -- harris did not like the colour of
his hair , didn't like his boots , either . well , i don't know what you'll do , i'm sure
, said our informant ; because they are the only two inns in the place . no other inns !
exclaimed harris . none , replied the man . what on earth are we to do ? cried harris .
then george spoke up . he said harris and i could get an hotel built for us , if we liked
, and have some people made to put in . for his part , he was going back to the stag . the
greatest minds never realise their ideals in any matter ; and harris and i sighed over the
hollowness of all earthly desires , and followed george . we took our traps into the stag
, and laid them down in the hall . the landlord came up and said : good evening ,
gentlemen . oh , good evening , said george ; we want three beds , please . very sorry ,
sir , said the landlord ; but i'm afraid we can't manage it . oh , well , never mind ,
said george , two will do . two of us can sleep in one bed , can't we ? he continued ,
turning to harris and me . harris said , oh , yes ; he thought george and i could sleep in
one bed very easily . very sorry , sir , again repeated the landlord : but we really
haven't got a bed vacant in the whole house . in fact , we are putting two , and even
three gentlemen in one bed , as it is . this staggered us for a bit . but harris , who is
an old traveller , rose to the occasion , and , laughing cheerily , said : oh , well , we
can't help it . we must rough it . you must give us a shake-down in the billiard-room .
very sorry , sir . three gentlemen sleeping on the billiard-table already , and two in the
coffee-room . can't possibly take you in to-night . we picked up our things , and went
over to the manor house . it was a pretty little place . i said i thought i should like it
better than the other house ; and harris said , oh , yes , it would be all right , and we

87
needn't look at the man with the red hair ; besides , the poor fellow couldn't help having
red hair . harris spoke quite kindly and sensibly about it . the people at the manor house
did not wait to hear us talk . the landlady met us on the doorstep with the greeting that
we were the fourteenth party she had turned away within the last hour and a half . as for
our meek suggestions of stables , billiard-room , or coal-cellars , she laughed them all
to scorn : all these nooks had been snatched up long ago . did she know of any place in
the whole village where we could get shelter for the night ? well , if we didn't mind
roughing it -- she did not recommend it , mind -- but there was a little beershop half a
mile down the eton road -- we waited to hear no more ; we caught up the hamper and the
bags , and the coats and rugs , and parcels , and ran . the distance seemed more like a
mile than half a mile , but we reached the place at last , and rushed , panting , into the
bar . the people at the beershop were rude . they merely laughed at us . there were only
three beds in the whole house , and they had seven single gentlemen and two married
couples sleeping there already . a kind-hearted bargeman , however , who happened to be in
the tap-room , thought we might try the grocer's , next door to the stag , and we went
back . the grocer's was full . an old woman we met in the shop then kindly took us along
with her for a quarter of a mile , to a lady friend of hers , who occasionally let rooms
to gentlemen . this old woman walked very slowly , and we were twenty minutes getting to
her lady friend's . she enlivened the journey by describing to us , as we trailed along ,
the various pains she had in her back . her lady friend's rooms were let . from there we
were recommended to no . 27 . no . 27 was full , and sent us to no . 32 , and 32 was full
. then we went back into the high road , and harris sat down on the hamper and said he
would go no further . he said it seemed a quiet spot , and he would like to die there . he
requested george and me to kiss his mother for him , and to tell all his relations that he
forgave them and died happy . at that moment an angel came by in the disguise of a small
boy and i cannot think of any more effective disguise an angel could have assumed , with a
can of beer in one hand , and in the other something at the end of a string , which he let
down on to every flat stone he came across , and then pulled up again , this producing a

88
peculiarly unattractive sound , suggestive of suffering . we asked this heavenly messenger
as we discovered him afterwards to be if he knew of any lonely house , whose occupants
were few and feeble old ladies or paralysed gentlemen preferred , who could be easily
frightened into giving up their beds for the night to three desperate men ; or , if not
this , could he recommend us to an empty pigstye , or a disused limekiln , or anything of
that sort . he did not know of any such place -- at least , not one handy ; but he said
that , if we liked to come with him , his mother had a room to spare , and could put us up
for the night . we fell upon his neck there in the moonlight and blessed him , and it
would have made a very beautiful picture if the boy himself had not been so over-powered
by our emotion as to be unable to sustain himself under it , and sunk to the ground ,
letting us all down on top of him . harris was so overcome with joy that he fainted , and
had to seize the boy's beer-can and half empty it before he could recover consciousness ,
and then he started off at a run , and left george and me to bring on the luggage . it was
a little four-roomed cottage where the boy lived , and his mother -- good soul ! -- gave
us hot bacon for supper , and we ate it all -- five pounds -- and a jam tart afterwards ,
and two pots of tea , and then we went to bed . there were two beds in the room ; one was
a 2ft . 6in . truckle bed , and george and i slept in that , and kept in by tying
ourselves together with a sheet ; and the other was the little boy's bed , and harris had
that all to himself , and we found him , in the morning , with two feet of bare leg
sticking out at the bottom , and george and i used it to hang the towels on while we
bathed . we were not so uppish about what sort of hotel we would have , next time we went
to datchet . to return to our present trip : nothing exciting happened , and we tugged
steadily on to a little below monkey island , where we drew up and lunched . we tackled
the cold beef for lunch , and then we found that we had forgotten to bring any mustard . i
don't think i ever in my life , before or since , felt i wanted mustard as badly as i felt
i wanted it then . i don't care for mustard as a rule , and it is very seldom that i take
it at all , but i would have given worlds for it then . i don't know how many worlds there
may be in the universe , but anyone who had brought me a spoonful of mustard at that

89
precise moment could have had them all . i grow reckless like that when i want a thing and
can't get it . harris said he would have given worlds for mustard too . it would have been
a good thing for anybody who had come up to that spot with a can of mustard , then : he
would have been set up in worlds for the rest of his life . but there ! i daresay both
harris and i would have tried to back out of the bargain after we had got the mustard .
one makes these extravagant offers in moments of excitement , but , of course , when one
comes to think of it , one sees how absurdly out of proportion they are with the value of
the required article . i heard a man , going up a mountain in switzerland , once say he
would give worlds for a glass of beer , and , when he came to a little shanty where they
kept it , he kicked up a most fearful row because they charged him five francs for a
bottle of bass . he said it was a scandalous imposition , and he wrote to the times about
it . it cast a gloom over the boat , there being no mustard . we ate our beef in silence .
existence seemed hollow and uninteresting . we thought of the happy days of childhood ,
and sighed . we brightened up a bit , however , over the apple-tart , and , when george
drew out a tin of pine-apple from the bottom of the hamper , and rolled it into the middle
of the boat , we felt that life was worth living after all . we are very fond of
pine-apple , all three of us . we looked at the picture on the tin ; we thought of the
juice . we smiled at one another , and harris got a spoon ready . then we looked for the
knife to open the tin with . we turned out everything in the hamper . we turned out the
bags . we pulled up the boards at the bottom of the boat . we took everything out on to
the bank and shook it . there was no tin-opener to be found . then harris tried to open
the tin with a pocket-knife , and broke the knife and cut himself badly ; and george tried
a pair of scissors , and the scissors flew up , and nearly put his eye out . while they
were dressing their wounds , i tried to make a hole in the thing with the spiky end of the
hitcher , and the hitcher slipped and jerked me out between the boat and the bank into two
feet of muddy water , and the tin rolled over , uninjured , and broke a teacup . then we
all got mad . we took that tin out on the bank , and harris went up into a field and got a
big sharp stone , and i went back into the boat and brought out the mast , and george held

90
the tin and harris held the sharp end of his stone against the top of it , and i took the
mast and poised it high up in the air , and gathered up all my strength and brought it
down . it was george's straw hat that saved his life that day . he keeps that hat now what
is left of it , and , of a winter's evening , when the pipes are lit and the boys are
telling stretchers about the dangers they have passed through , george brings it down and
shows it round , and the stirring tale is told anew , with fresh exaggerations every time
. harris got off with merely a flesh wound . after that , i took the tin off myself , and
hammered at it with the mast till i was worn out and sick at heart , whereupon harris took
it in hand . we beat it out flat ; we beat it back square ; we battered it into every form
known to geometry -- but we could not make a hole in it . then george went at it , and
knocked it into a shape , so strange , so weird , so unearthly in its wild hideousness ,
that he got frightened and threw away the mast . then we all three sat round it on the
grass and looked at it . there was one great dent across the top that had the appearance
of a mocking grin , and it drove us furious , so that harris rushed at the thing , and
caught it up , and flung it far into the middle of the river , and as it sank we hurled
our curses at it , and we got into the boat and rowed away from the spot , and never
paused till we reached maidenhead . maidenhead itself is too snobby to be pleasant . it is
the haunt of the river swell and his overdressed female companion . it is the town of
showy hotels , patronised chiefly by dudes and ballet girls . it is the witch's kitchen
from which go forth those demons of the river -- steam-launches . the london journal duke
always has his little place at maidenhead ; and the heroine of the three-volume novel
always dines there when she goes out on the spree with somebody else's husband . we went
through maidenhead quickly , and then eased up , and took leisurely that grand reach
beyond boulter's and cookham locks . clieveden woods still wore their dainty dress of
spring , and rose up , from the water's edge , in one long harmony of blended shades of
fairy green . in its unbroken loveliness this is , perhaps , the sweetest stretch of all
the river , and lingeringly we slowly drew our little boat away from its deep peace . we
pulled up in the backwater , just below cookham , and had tea ; and , when we were through

91
the lock , it was evening . a stiffish breeze had sprung up -- in our favour , for a
wonder ; for , as a rule on the river , the wind is always dead against you whatever way
you go . it is against you in the morning , when you start for a day's trip , and you pull
a long distance , thinking how easy it will be to come back with the sail . then , after
tea , the wind veers round , and you have to pull hard in its teeth all the way home .
when you forget to take the sail at all , then the wind is consistently in your favour
both ways . but there ! this world is only a probation , and man was born to trouble as
the sparks fly upward . this evening , however , they had evidently made a mistake , and
had put the wind round at our back instead of in our face . we kept very quiet about it ,
and got the sail up quickly before they found it out , and then we spread ourselves about
the boat in thoughtful attitudes , and the sail bellied out , and strained , and grumbled
at the mast , and the boat flew . i steered . there is no more thrilling sensation i know
of than sailing . it comes as near to flying as man has got to yet -- except in dreams .
the wings of the rushing wind seem to be bearing you onward , you know not where . you are
no longer the slow , plodding , puny thing of clay , creeping tortuously upon the ground ;
you are a part of nature ! your heart is throbbing against hers ! her glorious arms are
round you , raising you up against her heart ! your spirit is at one with hers ; your
limbs grow light ! the voices of the air are singing to you . the earth seems far away and
little ; and the clouds , so close above your head , are brothers , and you stretch your
arms to them . we had the river to ourselves , except that , far in the distance , we
could see a fishing-punt , moored in mid-stream , on which three fishermen sat ; and we
skimmed over the water , and passed the wooded banks , and no one spoke . i was steering .
as we drew nearer , we could see that the three men fishing seemed old and solemn-looking
men . they sat on three chairs in the punt , and watched intently their lines . and the
red sunset threw a mystic light upon the waters , and tinged with fire the towering woods
, and made a golden glory of the piled-up clouds . it was an hour of deep enchantment , of
ecstatic hope and longing . the little sail stood out against the purple sky , the
gloaming lay around us , wrapping the world in rainbow shadows ; and , behind us , crept

92
the night . we seemed like knights of some old legend , sailing across some mystic lake
into the unknown realm of twilight , unto the great land of the sunset . we did not go
into the realm of twilight ; we went slap into that punt , where those three old men were
fishing . we did not know what had happened at first , because the sail shut out the view
, but from the nature of the language that rose up upon the evening air , we gathered that
we had come into the neighbourhood of human beings , and that they were vexed and
discontented . harris let the sail down , and then we saw what had happened . we had
knocked those three old gentlemen off their chairs into a general heap at the bottom of
the boat , and they were now slowly and painfully sorting themselves out from each other ,
and picking fish off themselves ; and as they worked , they cursed us -- not with a common
cursory curse , but with long , carefully-thought-out , comprehensive curses , that
embraced the whole of our career , and went away into the distant future , and included
all our relations , and covered everything connected with us -- good , substantial curses
. harris told them they ought to be grateful for a little excitement , sitting there
fishing all day , and he also said that he was shocked and grieved to hear men their age
give way to temper so . but it did not do any good . george said he would steer , after
that . he said a mind like mine ought not to be expected to give itself away in steering
boats -- better let a mere commonplace human being see after that boat , before we jolly
well all got drowned ; and he took the lines , and brought us up to marlow . and at marlow
we left the boat by the bridge , and went and put up for the night at the crown . marlow
is one of the pleasantest river centres i know of . it is a bustling , lively little town
; not very picturesque on the whole , it is true , but there are many quaint nooks and
corners to be found in it , nevertheless -- standing arches in the shattered bridge of
time , over which our fancy travels back to the days when marlow manor owned saxon algar
for its lord , ere conquering william seized it to give to queen matilda , ere it passed
to the earls of warwick or to worldly-wise lord paget , the councillor of four successive
sovereigns . there is lovely country round about it , too , if , after boating , you are
fond of a walk , while the river itself is at its best here . down to cookham , past the

93
quarry woods and the meadows , is a lovely reach . dear old quarry woods ! with your
narrow , climbing paths , and little winding glades , how scented to this hour you seem
with memories of sunny summer days ! how haunted are your shadowy vistas with the ghosts
of laughing faces ! how from your whispering leaves there softly fall the voices of long
ago ! from marlow up to sonning is even fairer yet . grand old bisham abbey , whose stone
walls have rung to the shouts of the knights templars , and which , at one time , was the
home of anne of cleves and at another of queen elizabeth , is passed on the right bank
just half a mile above marlow bridge . bisham abbey is rich in melodramatic properties .
it contains a tapestry bed-chamber , and a secret room hid high up in the thick walls .
the ghost of the lady holy , who beat her little boy to death , still walks there at night
, trying to wash its ghostly hands clean in a ghostly basin . warwick , the king-maker ,
rests there , careless now about such trivial things as earthly kings and earthly kingdoms
; and salisbury , who did good service at poitiers . just before you come to the abbey ,
and right on the river's bank , is bisham church , and , perhaps , if any tombs are worth
inspecting , they are the tombs and monuments in bisham church . it was while floating in
his boat under the bisham beeches that shelley , who was then living at marlow you can see
his house now , in west street , composed the revolt of islam . by hurley weir , a little
higher up , i have often thought that i could stay a month without having sufficient time
to drink in all the beauty of the scene . the village of hurley , five minutes' walk from
the lock , is as old a little spot as there is on the river , dating , as it does , to
quote the quaint phraseology of those dim days , from the times of king sebert and king
offa . just past the weir going up is danes' field , where the invading danes once
encamped , during their march to gloucestershire ; and a little further still , nestling
by a sweet corner of the stream , is what is left of medmenham abbey . the famous
medmenham monks , or hell fire club , as they were commonly called , and of whom the
notorious wilkes was a member , were a fraternity whose motto was do as you please , and
that invitation still stands over the ruined doorway of the abbey . many years before this
bogus abbey , with its congregation of irreverent jesters , was founded , there stood upon

94
this same spot a monastery of a sterner kind , whose monks were of a somewhat different
type to the revellers that were to follow them , five hundred years afterwards . the
cistercian monks , whose abbey stood there in the thirteenth century , wore no clothes but
rough tunics and cowls , and ate no flesh , nor fish , nor eggs . they lay upon straw ,
and they rose at midnight to mass . they spent the day in labour , reading , and prayer ;
and over all their lives there fell a silence as of death , for no one spoke . a grim
fraternity , passing grim lives in that sweet spot , that god had made so bright ! strange
that nature's voices all around them -- the soft singing of the waters , the whisperings
of the river grass , the music of the rushing wind -- should not have taught them a truer
meaning of life than this . they listened there , through the long days , in silence ,
waiting for a voice from heaven ; and all day long and through the solemn night it spoke
to them in myriad tones , and they heard it not . from medmenham to sweet hambledon lock
the river is full of peaceful beauty , but , after it passes greenlands , the rather
uninteresting looking river residence of my newsagent -- a quiet unassuming old gentleman
, who may often be met with about these regions , during the summer months , sculling
himself along in easy vigorous style , or chatting genially to some old lock-keeper , as
he passes through -- until well the other side of henley , it is somewhat bare and dull .
we got up tolerably early on the monday morning at marlow , and went for a bathe before
breakfast ; and , coming back , montmorency made an awful ass of himself . the only
subject on which montmorency and i have any serious difference of opinion is cats . i like
cats ; montmorency does not . when i meet a cat , i say , poor pussy ! and stop down and
tickle the side of its head ; and the cat sticks up its tail in a rigid , cast-iron manner
, arches its back , and wipes its nose up against my trousers ; and all is gentleness and
peace . when montmorency meets a cat , the whole street knows about it ; and there is
enough bad language wasted in ten seconds to last an ordinarily respectable man all his
life , with care . i do not blame the dog contenting myself , as a rule , with merely
clouting his head or throwing stones at him , because i take it that it is his nature .
fox-terriers are born with about four times as much original sin in them as other dogs are

95
, and it will take years and years of patient effort on the part of us christians to bring
about any appreciable reformation in the rowdiness of the fox-terrier nature . i remember
being in the lobby of the haymarket stores one day , and all round about me were dogs ,
waiting for the return of their owners , who were shopping inside . there were a mastiff ,
and one or two collies , and a st . bernard , a few retrievers and newfoundlands , a
boar-hound , a french poodle , with plenty of hair round its head , but mangy about the
middle ; a bull-dog , a few lowther arcade sort of animals , about the size of rats , and
a couple of yorkshire tykes . there they sat , patient , good , and thoughtful . a solemn
peacefulness seemed to reign in that lobby . an air of calmness and resignation -- of
gentle sadness pervaded the room . then a sweet young lady entered , leading a
meek-looking little fox-terrier , and left him , chained up there , between the bull-dog
and the poodle . he sat and looked about him for a minute . then he cast up his eyes to
the ceiling , and seemed , judging from his expression , to be thinking of his mother .
then he yawned . then he looked round at the other dogs , all silent , grave , and
dignified . he looked at the bull-dog , sleeping dreamlessly on his right . he looked at
the poodle , erect and haughty , on his left . then , without a word of warning , without
the shadow of a provocation , he bit that poodle's near fore-leg , and a yelp of agony
rang through the quiet shades of that lobby . the result of his first experiment seemed
highly satisfactory to him , and he determined to go on and make things lively all round .
he sprang over the poodle and vigorously attacked a collie , and the collie woke up , and
immediately commenced a fierce and noisy contest with the poodle . then foxey came back to
his own place , and caught the bull-dog by the ear , and tried to throw him away ; and the
bull-dog , a curiously impartial animal , went for everything he could reach , including
the hall-porter , which gave that dear little terrier the opportunity to enjoy an
uninterrupted fight of his own with an equally willing yorkshire tyke . anyone who knows
canine nature need hardly , be told that , by this time , all the other dogs in the place
were fighting as if their hearths and homes depended on the fray . the big dogs fought
each other indiscriminately ; and the little dogs fought among themselves , and filled up

96
CHAPTER 9

their spare time by biting the legs of the big dogs . the whole lobby was a perfect
pandemonium , and the din was terrific . a crowd assembled outside in the haymarket , and
asked if it was a vestry meeting ; or , if not , who was being murdered , and why ? men
came with poles and ropes , and tried to separate the dogs , and the police were sent for
. and in the midst of the riot that sweet young lady returned , and snatched up that sweet
little dog of hers he had laid the tyke up for a month , and had on the expression , now ,
of a new-born lamb into her arms , and kissed him , and asked him if he was killed , and
what those great nasty brutes of dogs had been doing to him ; and he nestled up against
her , and gazed up into her face with a look that seemed to say : oh , i'm so glad you've
come to take me away from this disgraceful scene ! she said that the people at the stores
had no right to allow great savage things like those other dogs to be put with respectable
people's dogs , and that she had a great mind to summon somebody . such is the nature of
fox-terriers ; and , therefore , i do not blame montmorency for his tendency to row with
cats ; but he wished he had not given way to it that morning . we were , as i have said ,
returning from a dip , and half-way up the high street a cat darted out from one of the
houses in front of us , and began to trot across the road . montmorency gave a cry of joy
-- the cry of a stern warrior who sees his enemy given over to his hands -- the sort of
cry cromwell might have uttered when the scots came down the hill -- and flew after his
prey . his victim was a large black tom . i never saw a larger cat , nor a more
disreputable-looking cat . it had lost half its tail , one of its ears , and a fairly
appreciable proportion of its nose . it was a long , sinewy-looking animal . it had a calm
, contented air about it . montmorency went for that poor cat at the rate of twenty miles
an hour ; but the cat did not hurry up -- did not seem to have grasped the idea that its
life was in danger . it trotted quietly on until its would-be assassin was within a yard
of it , and then it turned round and sat down in the middle of the road , and looked at
montmorency with a gentle , inquiring expression , that said : yes ! you want me ?

97
montmorency does not lack pluck ; but there was something about the look of that cat that
might have chilled the heart of the boldest dog . he stopped abruptly , and looked back at
tom . neither spoke ; but the conversation that one could imagine was clearly as follows :
-- the cat : can i do anything for you ? montmorency : no -- no , thanks . the cat : don't
you mind speaking , if you really want anything , you know . montmorency backing down the
high street : oh , no -- not at all -- certainly -- don't you trouble . i -- i am afraid
i've made a mistake . i thought i knew you . sorry i disturbed you . the cat : not at all
-- quite a pleasure . sure you don't want anything , now ? montmorency still backing : not
at all , thanks -- not at all -- very kind of you . good morning . the cat : good-morning
. then the cat rose , and continued his trot ; and montmorency , fitting what he calls his
tail carefully into its groove , came back to us , and took up an unimportant position in
the rear . to this day , if you say the word cats ! to montmorency , he will visibly
shrink and look up piteously at you , as if to say : please don't . we did our marketing
after breakfast , and revictualled the boat for three days . george said we ought to take
vegetables -- that it was unhealthy not to eat vegetables . he said they were easy enough
to cook , and that he would see to that ; so we got ten pounds of potatoes , a bushel of
peas , and a few cabbages . we got a beefsteak pie , a couple of gooseberry tarts , and a
leg of mutton from the hotel ; and fruit , and cakes , and bread and butter , and jam ,
and bacon and eggs , and other things we foraged round about the town for . our departure
from marlow i regard as one of our greatest successes . it was dignified and impressive ,
without being ostentatious . we had insisted at all the shops we had been to that the
things should be sent with us then and there . none of your yes , sir , i will send them
off at once : the boy will be down there before you are , sir ! and then fooling about on
the landing-stage , and going back to the shop twice to have a row about them , for us .
we waited while the basket was packed , and took the boy with us . we went to a good many
shops , adopting this principle at each one ; and the consequence was that , by the time
we had finished , we had as fine a collection of boys with baskets following us around as
heart could desire ; and our final march down the middle of the high street , to the river

98
, must have been as imposing a spectacle as marlow had seen for many a long day . the
order of the procession was as follows : -- montmorency , carrying a stick . two
disreputable-looking curs , friends of montmorency's . george , carrying coats and rugs ,
and smoking a short pipe . harris , trying to walk with easy grace , while carrying a
bulged-out gladstone bag in one hand and a bottle of lime-juice in the other .
greengrocer's boy and baker's boy , with baskets . boots from the hotel , carrying hamper
. confectioner's boy , with basket . grocer's boy , with basket . long-haired dog .
cheesemonger's boy , with basket . odd man carrying a bag . bosom companion of odd man ,
with his hands in his pockets , smoking a short clay . fruiterer's boy , with basket .
myself , carrying three hats and a pair of boots , and trying to look as if i didn't know
it . six small boys , and four stray dogs . when we got down to the landing-stage , the
boatman said : let me see , sir ; was yours a steam-launch or a house-boat ? on our
informing him it was a double-sculling skiff , he seemed surprised . we had a good deal of
trouble with steam launches that morning . it was just before the henley week , and they
were going up in large numbers ; some by themselves , some towing houseboats . i do hate
steam launches : i suppose every rowing man does . i never see a steam launch but i feel i
should like to lure it to a lonely part of the river , and there , in the silence and the
solitude , strangle it . there is a blatant bumptiousness about a steam launch that has
the knack of rousing every evil instinct in my nature , and i yearn for the good old days
, when you could go about and tell people what you thought of them with a hatchet and a
bow and arrows . the expression on the face of the man who , with his hands in his pockets
, stands by the stern , smoking a cigar , is sufficient to excuse a breach of the peace by
itself ; and the lordly whistle for you to get out of the way would , i am confident ,
ensure a verdict of justifiable homicide from any jury of river men . they used to have to
whistle for us to get out of their way . if i may do so , without appearing boastful , i
think i can honestly say that our one small boat , during that week , caused more
annoyance and delay and aggravation to the steam launches that we came across than all the
other craft on the river put together . steam launch , coming ! one of us would cry out ,

99
on sighting the enemy in the distance ; and , in an instant , everything was got ready to
receive her . i would take the lines , and harris and george would sit down beside me ,
all of us with our backs to the launch , and the boat would drift out quietly into
mid-stream . on would come the launch , whistling , and on we would go , drifting . at
about a hundred yards off , she would start whistling like mad , and the people would come
and lean over the side , and roar at us ; but we never heard them ! harris would be
telling us an anecdote about his mother , and george and i would not have missed a word of
it for worlds . then that launch would give one final shriek of a whistle that would
nearly burst the boiler , and she would reverse her engines , and blow off steam , and
swing round and get aground ; everyone on board of it would rush to the bow and yell at us
, and the people on the bank would stand and shout to us , and all the other passing boats
would stop and join in , till the whole river for miles up and down was in a state of
frantic commotion . and then harris would break off in the most interesting part of his
narrative , and look up with mild surprise , and say to george : why , george , bless me ,
if here isn't a steam launch ! and george would answer : well , do you know , i thought i
heard something ! upon which we would get nervous and confused , and not know how to get
the boat out of the way , and the people in the launch would crowd round and instruct us :
pull your right -- you , you idiot ! back with your left . no , not you -- the other one
-- leave the lines alone , can't you -- now , both together . not that way . oh , you -- !
then they would lower a boat and come to our assistance ; and , after quarter of an hour's
effort , would get us clean out of their way , so that they could go on ; and we would
thank them so much , and ask them to give us a tow . but they never would . another good
way we discovered of irritating the aristocratic type of steam launch , was to mistake
them for a beanfeast , and ask them if they were messrs . cubit's lot or the bermondsey
good templars , and could they lend us a saucepan . old ladies , not accustomed to the
river , are always intensely nervous of steam launches . i remember going up once from
staines to windsor -- a stretch of water peculiarly rich in these mechanical monstrosities
-- with a party containing three ladies of this description . it was very exciting . at

100
the first glimpse of every steam launch that came in view , they insisted on landing and
sitting down on the bank until it was out of sight again . they said they were very sorry
, but that they owed it to their families not to be fool-hardy . we found ourselves short
of water at hambledon lock ; so we took our jar and went up to the lock-keeper's house to
beg for some . george was our spokesman . he put on a winning smile , and said : oh ,
please could you spare us a little water ? certainly , replied the old gentleman ; take as
much as you want , and leave the rest . thank you so much , murmured george , looking
about him . where -- where do you keep it ? it's always in the same place my boy , was the
stolid reply : just behind you . i don't see it , said george , turning round . why ,
bless us , where's your eyes ? was the man's comment , as he twisted george round and
pointed up and down the stream . there's enough of it to see , ain't there ? oh !
exclaimed george , grasping the idea ; but we can't drink the river , you know ! no ; but
you can drink some of it , replied the old fellow . it's what i've drunk for the last
fifteen years . george told him that his appearance , after the course , did not seem a
sufficiently good advertisement for the brand ; and that he would prefer it out of a pump
. we got some from a cottage a little higher up . i daresay that was only river water , if
we had known . but we did not know , so it was all right . what the eye does not see , the
stomach does not get upset over . we tried river water once , later on in the season , but
it was not a success . we were coming down stream , and had pulled up to have tea in a
backwater near windsor . our jar was empty , and it was a case of going without our tea or
taking water from the river . harris was for chancing it . he said it must be all right if
we boiled the water . he said that the various germs of poison present in the water would
be killed by the boiling . so we filled our kettle with thames backwater , and boiled it ;
and very careful we were to see that it did boil . we had made the tea , and were just
settling down comfortably to drink it , when george , with his cup half-way to his lips ,
paused and exclaimed : what's that ? what's what ? asked harris and i . why that ! said
george , looking westward . harris and i followed his gaze , and saw , coming down towards
us on the sluggish current , a dog . it was one of the quietest and peacefullest dogs i

101
have ever seen . i never met a dog who seemed more contented -- more easy in its mind . it
was floating dreamily on its back , with its four legs stuck up straight into the air . it
was what i should call a full-bodied dog , with a well-developed chest . on he came ,
serene , dignified , and calm , until he was abreast of our boat , and there , among the
rushes , he eased up , and settled down cosily for the evening . george said he didn't
want any tea , and emptied his cup into the water . harris did not feel thirsty , either ,
and followed suit . i had drunk half mine , but i wished i had not . i asked george if he
thought i was likely to have typhoid . he said : oh , no ; he thought i had a very good
chance indeed of escaping it . anyhow , i should know in about a fortnight , whether i had
or had not . we went up the backwater to wargrave . it is a short cut , leading out of the
right-hand bank about half a mile above marsh lock , and is well worth taking , being a
pretty , shady little piece of stream , besides saving nearly half a mile of distance . of
course , its entrance is studded with posts and chains , and surrounded with notice boards
, menacing all kinds of torture , imprisonment , and death to everyone who dares set scull
upon its waters -- i wonder some of these riparian boors don't claim the air of the river
and threaten everyone with forty shillings fine who breathes it -- but the posts and
chains a little skill will easily avoid ; and as for the boards , you might , if you have
five minutes to spare , and there is nobody about , take one or two of them down and throw
them into the river . half-way up the backwater , we got out and lunched ; and it was
during this lunch that george and i received rather a trying shock . harris received a
shock , too ; but i do not think harris's shock could have been anything like so bad as
the shock that george and i had over the business . you see , it was in this way : we were
sitting in a meadow , about ten yards from the water's edge , and we had just settled down
comfortably to feed . harris had the beefsteak pie between his knees , and was carving it
, and george and i were waiting with our plates ready . have you got a spoon there ? says
harris ; i want a spoon to help the gravy with . the hamper was close behind us , and
george and i both turned round to reach one out . we were not five seconds getting it .
when we looked round again , harris and the pie were gone ! it was a wide , open field .

102
there was not a tree or a bit of hedge for hundreds of yards . he could not have tumbled
into the river , because we were on the water side of him , and he would have had to climb
over us to do it . george and i gazed all about . then we gazed at each other . has he
been snatched up to heaven ? i queried . they'd hardly have taken the pie too , said
george . there seemed weight in this objection , and we discarded the heavenly theory . i
suppose the truth of the matter is , suggested george , descending to the commonplace and
practicable , that there has been an earthquake . and then he added , with a touch of
sadness in his voice : i wish he hadn't been carving that pie . with a sigh , we turned
our eyes once more towards the spot where harris and the pie had last been seen on earth ;
and there , as our blood froze in our veins and our hair stood up on end , we saw harris's
head -- and nothing but his head -- sticking bolt upright among the tall grass , the face
very red , and bearing upon it an expression of great indignation ! george was the first
to recover . speak ! he cried , and tell us whether you are alive or dead -- and where is
the rest of you ? oh , don't be a stupid ass ! said harris's head . i believe you did it
on purpose . did what ? exclaimed george and i . why , put me to sit here -- darn silly
trick ! here , catch hold of the pie . and out of the middle of the earth , as it seemed
to us , rose the pie -- very much mixed up and damaged ; and , after it , scrambled harris
-- tumbled , grubby , and wet . he had been sitting , without knowing it , on the very
verge of a small gully , the long grass hiding it from view ; and in leaning a little back
he had shot over , pie and all . he said he had never felt so surprised in all his life ,
as when he first felt himself going , without being able to conjecture in the slightest
what had happened . he thought at first that the end of the world had come . harris
believes to this day that george and i planned it all beforehand . thus does unjust
suspicion follow even the most blameless for , as the poet says , who shall escape calumny
? who , indeed ! we caught a breeze , after lunch , which took us gently up past wargrave
and shiplake . mellowed in the drowsy sunlight of a summer's afternoon , wargrave ,
nestling where the river bends , makes a sweet old picture as you pass it , and one that
lingers long upon the retina of memory . the george and dragon at wargrave boasts a sign ,

103
painted on the one side by leslie , r . a . , and on the other by hodgson of that ilk .
leslie has depicted the fight ; hodgson has imagined the scene , after the fight -- george
, the work done , enjoying his pint of beer . day , the author of sandford and merton ,
lived and -- more credit to the place still -- was killed at wargrave . in the church is a
memorial to mrs . sarah hill , who bequeathed 1 pound annually , to be divided at easter ,
between two boys and two girls who have never been undutiful to their parents ; who have
never been known to swear or to tell untruths , to steal , or to break windows . fancy
giving up all that for five shillings a year ! it is not worth it . it is rumoured in the
town that once , many years ago , a boy appeared who really never had done these things --
or at all events , which was all that was required or could be expected , had never been
known to do them -- and thus won the crown of glory . he was exhibited for three weeks
afterwards in the town hall , under a glass case . what has become of the money since no
one knows . they say it is always handed over to the nearest wax-works show . shiplake is
a pretty village , but it cannot be seen from the river , being upon the hill . tennyson
was married in shiplake church . the river up to sonning winds in and out through many
islands , and is very placid , hushed , and lonely . few folk , except at twilight , a
pair or two of rustic lovers , walk along its banks . 'arry and lord fitznoodle have been
left behind at henley , and dismal , dirty reading is not yet reached . it is a part of
the river in which to dream of bygone days , and vanished forms and faces , and things
that might have been , but are not , confound them . we got out at sonning , and went for
a walk round the village . it is the most fairy-like little nook on the whole river . it
is more like a stage village than one built of bricks and mortar . every house is
smothered in roses , and now , in early june , they were bursting forth in clouds of
dainty splendour . if you stop at sonning , put up at the bull , behind the church . it is
a veritable picture of an old country inn , with green , square courtyard in front , where
, on seats beneath the trees , the old men group of an evening to drink their ale and
gossip over village politics ; with low , quaint rooms and latticed windows , and awkward
stairs and winding passages . we roamed about sweet sonning for an hour or so , and then ,

104
it being too late to push on past reading , we decided to go back to one of the shiplake
islands , and put up there for the night . it was still early when we got settled , and
george said that , as we had plenty of time , it would be a splendid opportunity to try a
good , slap-up supper . he said he would show us what could be done up the river in the
way of cooking , and suggested that , with the vegetables and the remains of the cold beef
and general odds and ends , we should make an irish stew . it seemed a fascinating idea .
george gathered wood and made a fire , and harris and i started to peel the potatoes . i
should never have thought that peeling potatoes was such an undertaking . the job turned
out to be the biggest thing of its kind that i had ever been in . we began cheerfully ,
one might almost say skittishly , but our light-heartedness was gone by the time the first
potato was finished . the more we peeled , the more peel there seemed to be left on ; by
the time we had got all the peel off and all the eyes out , there was no potato left -- at
least none worth speaking of . george came and had a look at it -- it was about the size
of a pea-nut . he said : oh , that won't do ! you're wasting them . you must scrape them .
so we scraped them , and that was harder work than peeling . they are such an
extraordinary shape , potatoes -- all bumps and warts and hollows . we worked steadily for
five-and-twenty minutes , and did four potatoes . then we struck . we said we should
require the rest of the evening for scraping ourselves . i never saw such a thing as
potato-scraping for making a fellow in a mess . it seemed difficult to believe that the
potato-scrapings in which harris and i stood , half smothered , could have come off four
potatoes . it shows you what can be done with economy and care . george said it was absurd
to have only four potatoes in an irish stew , so we washed half-a-dozen or so more , and
put them in without peeling . we also put in a cabbage and about half a peck of peas .
george stirred it all up , and then he said that there seemed to be a lot of room to spare
, so we overhauled both the hampers , and picked out all the odds and ends and the
remnants , and added them to the stew . there were half a pork pie and a bit of cold
boiled bacon left , and we put them in . then george found half a tin of potted salmon ,
and he emptied that into the pot . he said that was the advantage of irish stew : you got

105
rid of such a lot of things . i fished out a couple of eggs that had got cracked , and put
those in . george said they would thicken the gravy . i forget the other ingredients , but
i know nothing was wasted ; and i remember that , towards the end , montmorency , who had
evinced great interest in the proceedings throughout , strolled away with an earnest and
thoughtful air , reappearing , a few minutes afterwards , with a dead water-rat in his
mouth , which he evidently wished to present as his contribution to the dinner ; whether
in a sarcastic spirit , or with a genuine desire to assist , i cannot say . we had a
discussion as to whether the rat should go in or not . harris said that he thought it
would be all right , mixed up with the other things , and that every little helped ; but
george stood up for precedent . he said he had never heard of water-rats in irish stew ,
and he would rather be on the safe side , and not try experiments . harris said : if you
never try a new thing , how can you tell what it's like ? it's men such as you that hamper
the world's progress . think of the man who first tried german sausage ! it was a great
success , that irish stew . i don't think i ever enjoyed a meal more . there was something
so fresh and piquant about it . one's palate gets so tired of the old hackneyed things :
here was a dish with a new flavour , with a taste like nothing else on earth . and it was
nourishing , too . as george said , there was good stuff in it . the peas and potatoes
might have been a bit softer , but we all had good teeth , so that did not matter much :
and as for the gravy , it was a poem -- a little too rich , perhaps , for a weak stomach ,
but nutritious . we finished up with tea and cherry tart . montmorency had a fight with
the kettle during tea-time , and came off a poor second . throughout the trip , he had
manifested great curiosity concerning the kettle . he would sit and watch it , as it
boiled , with a puzzled expression , and would try and rouse it every now and then by
growling at it . when it began to splutter and steam , he regarded it as a challenge , and
would want to fight it , only , at that precise moment , some one would always dash up and
bear off his prey before he could get at it . to-day he determined he would be beforehand
. at the first sound the kettle made , he rose , growling , and advanced towards it in a
threatening attitude . it was only a little kettle , but it was full of pluck , and it up

106
and spit at him . ah ! would ye ! growled montmorency , showing his teeth ; i'll teach ye
to cheek a hard-working , respectable dog ; ye miserable , long-nosed , dirty-looking
scoundrel , ye . come on ! and he rushed at that poor little kettle , and seized it by the
spout . then , across the evening stillness , broke a blood-curdling yelp , and
montmorency left the boat , and did a constitutional three times round the island at the
rate of thirty-five miles an hour , stopping every now and then to bury his nose in a bit
of cool mud . from that day montmorency regarded the kettle with a mixture of awe ,
suspicion , and hate . whenever he saw it he would growl and back at a rapid rate , with
his tail shut down , and the moment it was put upon the stove he would promptly climb out
of the boat , and sit on the bank , till the whole tea business was over . george got out
his banjo after supper , and wanted to play it , but harris objected : he said he had got
a headache , and did not feel strong enough to stand it . george thought the music might
do him good -- said music often soothed the nerves and took away a headache ; and he
twanged two or three notes , just to show harris what it was like . harris said he would
rather have the headache . george has never learned to play the banjo to this day . he has
had too much all-round discouragement to meet . he tried on two or three evenings , while
we were up the river , to get a little practice , but it was never a success . harris's
language used to be enough to unnerve any man ; added to which , montmorency would sit and
howl steadily , right through the performance . it was not giving the man a fair chance .
what's he want to howl like that for when i'm playing ? george would exclaim indignantly ,
while taking aim at him with a boot . what do you want to play like that for when he is
howling ? harris would retort , catching the boot . you let him alone . he can't help
howling . he's got a musical ear , and your playing makes him howl . so george determined
to postpone study of the banjo until he reached home . but he did not get much opportunity
even there . mrs . p . used to come up and say she was very sorry -- for herself , she
liked to hear him -- but the lady upstairs was in a very delicate state , and the doctor
was afraid it might injure the child . then george tried taking it out with him late at
night , and practising round the square . but the inhabitants complained to the police

107
about it , and a watch was set for him one night , and he was captured . the evidence
against him was very clear , and he was bound over to keep the peace for six months . he
seemed to lose heart in the business after that . he did make one or two feeble efforts to
take up the work again when the six months had elapsed , but there was always the same
coldness -- the same want of sympathy on the part of the world to fight against ; and ,
after awhile , he despaired altogether , and advertised the instrument for sale at a great
sacrifice -- owner having no further use for same -- and took to learning card tricks
instead . it must be disheartening work learning a musical instrument . you would think
that society , for its own sake , would do all it could to assist a man to acquire the art
of playing a musical instrument . but it doesn't ! i knew a young fellow once , who was
studying to play the bagpipes , and you would be surprised at the amount of opposition he
had to contend with . why , not even from the members of his own family did he receive
what you could call active encouragement . his father was dead against the business from
the beginning , and spoke quite unfeelingly on the subject . my friend used to get up
early in the morning to practise , but he had to give that plan up , because of his sister
. she was somewhat religiously inclined , and she said it seemed such an awful thing to
begin the day like that . so he sat up at night instead , and played after the family had
gone to bed , but that did not do , as it got the house such a bad name . people , going
home late , would stop outside to listen , and then put it about all over the town , the
next morning , that a fearful murder had been committed at mr . jefferson's the night
before ; and would describe how they had heard the victim's shrieks and the brutal oaths
and curses of the murderer , followed by the prayer for mercy , and the last dying gurgle
of the corpse . so they let him practise in the day-time , in the back-kitchen with all
the doors shut ; but his more successful passages could generally be heard in the
sitting-room , in spite of these precautions , and would affect his mother almost to tears
. she said it put her in mind of her poor father he had been swallowed by a shark , poor
man , while bathing off the coast of new guinea -- where the connection came in , she
could not explain . then they knocked up a little place for him at the bottom of the

108
CHAPTER 10

garden , about quarter of a mile from the house , and made him take the machine down there
when he wanted to work it ; and sometimes a visitor would come to the house who knew
nothing of the matter , and they would forget to tell him all about it , and caution him ,
and he would go out for a stroll round the garden and suddenly get within earshot of those
bagpipes , without being prepared for it , or knowing what it was . if he were a man of
strong mind , it only gave him fits ; but a person of mere average intellect it usually
sent mad . there is , it must be confessed , something very sad about the early efforts of
an amateur in bagpipes . i have felt that myself when listening to my young friend . they
appear to be a trying instrument to perform upon . you have to get enough breath for the
whole tune before you start -- at least , so i gathered from watching jefferson . he would
begin magnificently with a wild , full , come-to-the-battle sort of a note , that quite
roused you . but he would get more and more piano as he went on , and the last verse
generally collapsed in the middle with a splutter and a hiss . you want to be in good
health to play the bagpipes . young jefferson only learnt to play one tune on those
bagpipes ; but i never heard any complaints about the insufficiency of his repertoire --
none whatever . this tune was the campbells are coming , hooray -- hooray ! so he said ,
though his father always held that it was the blue bells of scotland . nobody seemed quite
sure what it was exactly , but they all agreed that it sounded scotch . strangers were
allowed three guesses , and most of them guessed a different tune each time . harris was
disagreeable after supper , -- i think it must have been the stew that had upset him : he
is not used to high living , -- so george and i left him in the boat , and settled to go
for a mouch round henley . he said he should have a glass of whisky and a pipe , and fix
things up for the night . we were to shout when we returned , and he would row over from
the island and fetch us . don't go to sleep , old man , we said as we started . not much
fear of that while this stew's on , he grunted , as he pulled back to the island . henley
was getting ready for the regatta , and was full of bustle . we met a goodish number of

109
men we knew about the town , and in their pleasant company the time slipped by somewhat
quickly ; so that it was nearly eleven o'clock before we set off on our four-mile walk
home -- as we had learned to call our little craft by this time . it was a dismal night ,
coldish , with a thin rain falling ; and as we trudged through the dark , silent fields ,
talking low to each other , and wondering if we were going right or not , we thought of
the cosy boat , with the bright light streaming through the tight-drawn canvas ; of harris
and montmorency , and the whisky , and wished that we were there . we conjured up the
picture of ourselves inside , tired and a little hungry ; of the gloomy river and the
shapeless trees ; and , like a giant glow-worm underneath them , our dear old boat , so
snug and warm and cheerful . we could see ourselves at supper there , pecking away at cold
meat , and passing each other chunks of bread ; we could hear the cheery clatter of our
knives , the laughing voices , filling all the space , and overflowing through the opening
out into the night . and we hurried on to realise the vision . we struck the tow-path at
length , and that made us happy ; because prior to this we had not been sure whether we
were walking towards the river or away from it , and when you are tired and want to go to
bed uncertainties like that worry you . we passed skiplake as the clock was striking the
quarter to twelve ; and then george said , thoughtfully : you don't happen to remember
which of the islands it was , do you ? no , i replied , beginning to grow thoughtful too ,
i don't . how many are there ? only four , answered george . it will be all right , if
he's awake . and if not ? i queried ; but we dismissed that train of thought . we shouted
when we came opposite the first island , but there was no response ; so we went to the
second , and tried there , and obtained the same result . oh ! i remember now , said
george ; it was the third one . and we ran on hopefully to the third one , and hallooed .
no answer ! the case was becoming serious . it was now past midnight . the hotels at
skiplake and henley would be crammed ; and we could not go round , knocking up cottagers
and householders in the middle of the night , to know if they let apartments ! george
suggested walking back to henley and assaulting a policeman , and so getting a night's
lodging in the station-house . but then there was the thought , suppose he only hits us

110
back and refuses to lock us up ! we could not pass the whole night fighting policemen .
besides , we did not want to overdo the thing and get six months . we despairingly tried
what seemed in the darkness to be the fourth island , but met with no better success . the
rain was coming down fast now , and evidently meant to last . we were wet to the skin ,
and cold and miserable . we began to wonder whether there were only four islands or more ,
or whether we were near the islands at all , or whether we were anywhere within a mile of
where we ought to be , or in the wrong part of the river altogether ; everything looked so
strange and different in the darkness . we began to understand the sufferings of the babes
in the wood . just when we had given up all hope -- yes , i know that is always the time
that things do happen in novels and tales ; but i can't help it . i resolved , when i
began to write this book , that i would be strictly truthful in all things ; and so i will
be , even if i have to employ hackneyed phrases for the purpose . it was just when we had
given up all hope , and i must therefore say so . just when we had given up all hope ,
then , i suddenly caught sight , a little way below us , of a strange , weird sort of
glimmer flickering among the trees on the opposite bank . for an instant i thought of
ghosts : it was such a shadowy , mysterious light . the next moment it flashed across me
that it was our boat , and i sent up such a yell across the water that made the night seem
to shake in its bed . we waited breathless for a minute , and then -- oh ! divinest music
of the darkness ! -- we heard the answering bark of montmorency . we shouted back loud
enough to wake the seven sleepers -- i never could understand myself why it should take
more noise to wake seven sleepers than one -- and , after what seemed an hour , but what
was really , i suppose , about five minutes , we saw the lighted boat creeping slowly over
the blackness , and heard harris's sleepy voice asking where we were . there was an
unaccountable strangeness about harris . it was something more than mere ordinary
tiredness . he pulled the boat against a part of the bank from which it was quite
impossible for us to get into it , and immediately went to sleep . it took us an immense
amount of screaming and roaring to wake him up again and put some sense into him ; but we
succeeded at last , and got safely on board . harris had a sad expression on him , so we

111
noticed , when we got into the boat . he gave you the idea of a man who had been through
trouble . we asked him if anything had happened , and he said -- swans ! it seemed we had
moored close to a swan's nest , and , soon after george and i had gone , the female swan
came back , and kicked up a row about it . harris had chivied her off , and she had gone
away , and fetched up her old man . harris said he had had quite a fight with these two
swans ; but courage and skill had prevailed in the end , and he had defeated them .
half-an-hour afterwards they returned with eighteen other swans ! it must have been a
fearful battle , so far as we could understand harris's account of it . the swans had
tried to drag him and montmorency out of the boat and drown them ; and he had defended
himself like a hero for four hours , and had killed the lot , and they had all paddled
away to die . how many swans did you say there were ? asked george . thirty-two , replied
harris , sleepily . you said eighteen just now , said george . no , i didn't , grunted
harris ; i said twelve . think i can't count ? what were the real facts about these swans
we never found out . we questioned harris on the subject in the morning , and he said ,
what swans ? and seemed to think that george and i had been dreaming . oh , how delightful
it was to be safe in the boat , after our trials and fears ! we ate a hearty supper ,
george and i , and we should have had some toddy after it , if we could have found the
whisky , but we could not . we examined harris as to what he had done with it ; but he did
not seem to know what we meant by whisky , or what we were talking about at all .
montmorency looked as if he knew something , but said nothing . i slept well that night ,
and should have slept better if it had not been for harris . i have a vague recollection
of having been woke up at least a dozen times during the night by harris wandering about
the boat with the lantern , looking for his clothes . he seemed to be worrying about his
clothes all night . twice he routed up george and myself to see if we were lying on his
trousers . george got quite wild the second time . what the thunder do you want your
trousers for , in the middle of the night ? he asked indignantly . why don't you lie down
, and go to sleep ? i found him in trouble , the next time i awoke , because he could not
find his socks ; and my last hazy remembrance is of being rolled over on my side , and of

112
hearing harris muttering something about its being an extraordinary thing where his
umbrella could have got to . we woke late the next morning , and , at harris's earnest
desire , partook of a plain breakfast , with non dainties . then we cleaned up , and put
everything straight a continual labour , which was beginning to afford me a pretty clear
insight into a question that had often posed me -- namely , how a woman with the work of
only one house on her hands manages to pass away her time , and , at about ten , set out
on what we had determined should be a good day's journey . we agreed that we would pull
this morning , as a change from towing ; and harris thought the best arrangement would be
that george and i should scull , and he steer . i did not chime in with this idea at all ;
i said i thought harris would have been showing a more proper spirit if he had suggested
that he and george should work , and let me rest a bit . it seemed to me that i was doing
more than my fair share of the work on this trip , and i was beginning to feel strongly on
the subject . it always does seem to me that i am doing more work than i should do . it is
not that i object to the work , mind you ; i like work : it fascinates me . i can sit and
look at it for hours . i love to keep it by me : the idea of getting rid of it nearly
breaks my heart . you cannot give me too much work ; to accumulate work has almost become
a passion with me : my study is so full of it now , that there is hardly an inch of room
for any more . i shall have to throw out a wing soon . and i am careful of my work , too .
why , some of the work that i have by me now has been in my possession for years and years
, and there isn't a finger-mark on it . i take a great pride in my work ; i take it down
now and then and dust it . no man keeps his work in a better state of preservation than i
do . but , though i crave for work , i still like to be fair . i do not ask for more than
my proper share . but i get it without asking for it -- at least , so it appears to me --
and this worries me . george says he does not think i need trouble myself on the subject .
he thinks it is only my over-scrupulous nature that makes me fear i am having more than my
due ; and that , as a matter of fact , i don't have half as much as i ought . but i expect
he only says this to comfort me . in a boat , i have always noticed that it is the fixed
idea of each member of the crew that he is doing everything . harris's notion was , that

113
it was he alone who had been working , and that both george and i had been imposing upon
him . george , on the other hand , ridiculed the idea of harris's having done anything
more than eat and sleep , and had a cast-iron opinion that it was he -- george himself --
who had done all the labour worth speaking of . he said he had never been out with such a
couple of lazily skulks as harris and i . that amused harris . fancy old george talking
about work ! he laughed ; why , about half-an-hour of it would kill him . have you ever
seen george work ? he added , turning to me . i agreed with harris that i never had --
most certainly not since we had started on this trip . well , i don't see how you can know
much about it , one way or the other , george retorted on harris ; for i'm blest if you
haven't been asleep half the time . have you ever seen harris fully awake , except at
meal-time ? asked george , addressing me . truth compelled me to support george . harris
had been very little good in the boat , so far as helping was concerned , from the
beginning . well , hang it all , i've done more than old j . , anyhow , rejoined harris .
well , you couldn't very well have done less , added george . i suppose j . thinks he is
the passenger , continued harris . and that was their gratitude to me for having brought
them and their wretched old boat all the way up from kingston , and for having
superintended and managed everything for them , and taken care of them , and slaved for
them . it is the way of the world . we settled the present difficulty by arranging that
harris and george should scull up past reading , and that i should tow the boat on from
there . pulling a heavy boat against a strong stream has few attractions for me now .
there was a time , long ago , when i used to clamour for the hard work : now i like to
give the youngsters a chance . i notice that most of the old river hands are similarly
retiring , whenever there is any stiff pulling to be done . you can always tell the old
river hand by the way in which he stretches himself out upon the cushions at the bottom of
the boat , and encourages the rowers by telling them anecdotes about the marvellous feats
he performed last season . call what you're doing hard work ! he drawls , between his
contented whiffs , addressing the two perspiring novices , who have been grinding away
steadily up stream for the last hour and a half ; why , jim biffles and jack and i , last

114
season , pulled up from marlow to goring in one afternoon -- never stopped once . do you
remember that , jack ? jack , who has made himself a bed up in the prow of all the rugs
and coats he can collect , and who has been lying there asleep for the last two hours ,
partially wakes up on being thus appealed to , and recollects all about the matter , and
also remembers that there was an unusually strong stream against them all the way --
likewise a stiff wind . about thirty-four miles , i suppose , it must have been , adds the
first speaker , reaching down another cushion to put under his head . no -- no ; don't
exaggerate , tom , murmurs jack , reprovingly ; thirty-three at the outside . and jack and
tom , quite exhausted by this conversational effort , drop off to sleep once more . and
the two simple-minded youngsters at the sculls feel quite proud of being allowed to row
such wonderful oarsmen as jack and tom , and strain away harder than ever . when i was a
young man , i used to listen to these tales from my elders , and take them in , and
swallow them , and digest every word of them , and then come up for more ; but the new
generation do not seem to have the simple faith of the old times . we -- george , harris ,
and myself -- took a raw 'un up with us once last season , and we plied him with the
customary stretchers about the wonderful things we had done all the way up . we gave him
all the regular ones -- the time-honoured lies that have done duty up the river with every
boating-man for years past -- and added seven entirely original ones that we had invented
for ourselves , including a really quite likely story , founded , to a certain extent , on
an all but true episode , which had actually happened in a modified degree some years ago
to friends of ours -- a story that a mere child could have believed without injuring
itself , much . and that young man mocked at them all , and wanted us to repeat the feats
then and there , and to bet us ten to one that we didn't . we got to chatting about our
rowing experiences this morning , and to recounting stories of our first efforts in the
art of oarsmanship . my own earliest boating recollection is of five of us contributing
threepence each and taking out a curiously constructed craft on the regent's park lake ,
drying ourselves subsequently , in the park-keeper's lodge . after that , having acquired
a taste for the water , i did a good deal of rafting in various suburban brickfields -- an

115
exercise providing more interest and excitement than might be imagined , especially when
you are in the middle of the pond and the proprietor of the materials of which the raft is
constructed suddenly appears on the bank , with a big stick in his hand . your first
sensation on seeing this gentleman is that , somehow or other , you don't feel equal to
company and conversation , and that , if you could do so without appearing rude , you
would rather avoid meeting him ; and your object is , therefore , to get off on the
opposite side of the pond to which he is , and to go home quietly and quickly , pretending
not to see him . he , on the contrary is yearning to take you by the hand , and talk to
you . it appears that he knows your father , and is intimately acquainted with yourself ,
but this does not draw you towards him . he says he'll teach you to take his boards and
make a raft of them ; but , seeing that you know how to do this pretty well already , the
offer , though doubtless kindly meant , seems a superfluous one on his part , and you are
reluctant to put him to any trouble by accepting it . his anxiety to meet you , however ,
is proof against all your coolness , and the energetic manner in which he dodges up and
down the pond so as to be on the spot to greet you when you land is really quite
flattering . if he be of a stout and short-winded build , you can easily avoid his
advances ; but , when he is of the youthful and long-legged type , a meeting is inevitable
. the interview is , however , extremely brief , most of the conversation being on his
part , your remarks being mostly of an exclamatory and mono-syllabic order , and as soon
as you can tear yourself away you do so . i devoted some three months to rafting , and ,
being then as proficient as there was any need to be at that branch of the art , i
determined to go in for rowing proper , and joined one of the lea boating clubs . being
out in a boat on the river lea , especially on saturday afternoons , soon makes you smart
at handling a craft , and spry at escaping being run down by roughs or swamped by barges ;
and it also affords plenty of opportunity for acquiring the most prompt and graceful
method of lying down flat at the bottom of the boat so as to avoid being chucked out into
the river by passing tow-lines . but it does not give you style . it was not till i came
to the thames that i got style . my style of rowing is very much admired now . people say

116
it is so quaint . george never went near the water until he was sixteen . then he and
eight other gentlemen of about the same age went down in a body to kew one saturday , with
the idea of hiring a boat there , and pulling to richmond and back ; one of their number ,
a shock-headed youth , named joskins , who had once or twice taken out a boat on the
serpentine , told them it was jolly fun , boating ! the tide was running out pretty
rapidly when they reached the landing-stage , and there was a stiff breeze blowing across
the river , but this did not trouble them at all , and they proceeded to select their boat
. there was an eight-oared racing outrigger drawn up on the stage ; that was the one that
took their fancy . they said they'd have that one , please . the boatman was away , and
only his boy was in charge . the boy tried to damp their ardour for the outrigger , and
showed them two or three very comfortable-looking boats of the family-party build , but
those would not do at all ; the outrigger was the boat they thought they would look best
in . so the boy launched it , and they took off their coats and prepared to take their
seats . the boy suggested that george , who , even in those days , was always the heavy
man of any party , should be number four . george said he should be happy to be number
four , and promptly stepped into bow's place , and sat down with his back to the stern .
they got him into his proper position at last , and then the others followed . a
particularly nervous boy was appointed cox , and the steering principle explained to him
by joskins . joskins himself took stroke . he told the others that it was simple enough ;
all they had to do was to follow him . they said they were ready , and the boy on the
landing stage took a boat-hook and shoved him off . what then followed george is unable to
describe in detail . he has a confused recollection of having , immediately on starting ,
received a violent blow in the small of the back from the butt-end of number five's scull
, at the same time that his own seat seemed to disappear from under him by magic , and
leave him sitting on the boards . he also noticed , as a curious circumstance , that
number two was at the same instant lying on his back at the bottom of the boat , with his
legs in the air , apparently in a fit . they passed under kew bridge , broadside , at the
rate of eight miles an hour . joskins being the only one who was rowing . george , on

117
recovering his seat , tried to help him , but , on dipping his oar into the water , it
immediately , to his intense surprise , disappeared under the boat , and nearly took him
with it . and then cox threw both rudder lines over-board , and burst into tears . how
they got back george never knew , but it took them just forty minutes . a dense crowd
watched the entertainment from kew bridge with much interest , and everybody shouted out
to them different directions . three times they managed to get the boat back through the
arch , and three times they were carried under it again , and every time cox looked up and
saw the bridge above him he broke out into renewed sobs . george said he little thought
that afternoon that he should ever come to really like boating . harris is more accustomed
to sea rowing than to river work , and says that , as an exercise , he prefers it . i
don't . i remember taking a small boat out at eastbourne last summer : i used to do a good
deal of sea rowing years ago , and i thought i should be all right ; but i found i had
forgotten the art entirely . when one scull was deep down underneath the water , the other
would be flourishing wildly about in the air . to get a grip of the water with both at the
same time i had to stand up . the parade was crowded with nobility and gentry , and i had
to pull past them in this ridiculous fashion . i landed half-way down the beach , and
secured the services of an old boatman to take me back . i like to watch an old boatman
rowing , especially one who has been hired by the hour . there is something so beautifully
calm and restful about his method . it is so free from that fretful haste , that vehement
striving , that is every day becoming more and more the bane of nineteenth-century life .
he is not for ever straining himself to pass all the other boats . if another boat
overtakes him and passes him it does not annoy him ; as a matter of fact , they all do
overtake him and pass him -- all those that are going his way . this would trouble and
irritate some people ; the sublime equanimity of the hired boatman under the ordeal
affords us a beautiful lesson against ambition and uppishness . plain practical rowing of
the get-the-boat-along order is not a very difficult art to acquire , but it takes a good
deal of practice before a man feels comfortable , when rowing past girls . it is the time
that worries a youngster . it's jolly funny , he says , as for the twentieth time within

118
five minutes he disentangles his sculls from yours ; i can get on all right when i'm by
myself ! to see two novices try to keep time with one another is very amusing . bow finds
it impossible to keep pace with stroke , because stroke rows in such an extraordinary
fashion . stroke is intensely indignant at this , and explains that what he has been
endeavouring to do for the last ten minutes is to adapt his method to bow's limited
capacity . bow , in turn , then becomes insulted , and requests stroke not to trouble his
head about him bow , but to devote his mind to setting a sensible stroke . or , shall i
take stroke ? he adds , with the evident idea that that would at once put the whole matter
right . they splash along for another hundred yards with still moderate success , and then
the whole secret of their trouble bursts upon stroke like a flash of inspiration . i tell
you what it is : you've got my sculls , he cries , turning to bow ; pass yours over . well
, do you know , i've been wondering how it was i couldn't get on with these , answers bow
, quite brightening up , and most willingly assisting in the exchange . now we shall be
all right . but they are not -- not even then . stroke has to stretch his arms nearly out
of their sockets to reach his sculls now ; while bow's pair , at each recovery , hit him a
violent blow in the chest . so they change back again , and come to the conclusion that
the man has given them the wrong set altogether ; and over their mutual abuse of this man
they become quite friendly and sympathetic . george said he had often longed to take to
punting for a change . punting is not as easy as it looks . as in rowing , you soon learn
how to get along and handle the craft , but it takes long practice before you can do this
with dignity and without getting the water all up your sleeve . one young man i knew had a
very sad accident happen to him the first time he went punting . he had been getting on so
well that he had grown quite cheeky over the business , and was walking up and down the
punt , working his pole with a careless grace that was quite fascinating to watch . up he
would march to the head of the punt , plant his pole , and then run along right to the
other end , just like an old punter . oh ! it was grand . and it would all have gone on
being grand if he had not unfortunately , while looking round to enjoy the scenery , taken
just one step more than there was any necessity for , and walked off the punt altogether .

119
the pole was firmly fixed in the mud , and he was left clinging to it while the punt
drifted away . it was an undignified position for him . a rude boy on the bank immediately
yelled out to a lagging chum to hurry up and see a real monkey on a stick . i could not go
to his assistance , because , as ill-luck would have it , we had not taken the proper
precaution to bring out a spare pole with us . i could only sit and look at him . his
expression as the pole slowly sank with him i shall never forget ; there was so much
thought in it . i watched him gently let down into the water , and saw him scramble out ,
sad and wet . i could not help laughing , he looked such a ridiculous figure . i continued
to chuckle to myself about it for some time , and then it was suddenly forced in upon me
that really i had got very little to laugh at when i came to think of it . here was i ,
alone in a punt , without a pole , drifting helplessly down mid-stream -- possibly towards
a weir . i began to feel very indignant with my friend for having stepped overboard and
gone off in that way . he might , at all events , have left me the pole . i drifted on for
about a quarter of a mile , and then i came in sight of a fishing-punt moored in
mid-stream , in which sat two old fishermen . they saw me bearing down upon them , and
they called out to me to keep out of their way . i can't , i shouted back . but you don't
try , they answered . i explained the matter to them when i got nearer , and they caught
me and lent me a pole . the weir was just fifty yards below . i am glad they happened to
be there . the first time i went punting was in company with three other fellows ; they
were going to show me how to do it . we could not all start together , so i said i would
go down first and get out the punt , and then i could potter about and practice a bit
until they came . i could not get a punt out that afternoon , they were all engaged ; so i
had nothing else to do but to sit down on the bank , watching the river , and waiting for
my friends . i had not been sitting there long before my attention became attracted to a
man in a punt who , i noticed with some surprise , wore a jacket and cap exactly like mine
. he was evidently a novice at punting , and his performance was most interesting . you
never knew what was going to happen when he put the pole in ; he evidently did not know
himself . sometimes he shot up stream and sometimes he shot down stream , and at other

120
CHAPTER 11

times he simply spun round and came up the other side of the pole . and with every result
he seemed equally surprised and annoyed . the people about the river began to get quite
absorbed in him after a while , and to make bets with one another as to what would be the
outcome of his next push . in the course of time my friends arrived on the opposite bank ,
and they stopped and watched him too . his back was towards them , and they only saw his
jacket and cap . from this they immediately jumped to the conclusion that it was i , their
beloved companion , who was making an exhibition of himself , and their delight knew no
bounds . they commenced to chaff him unmercifully . i did not grasp their mistake at first
, and i thought , how rude of them to go on like that , with a perfect stranger , too !
but before i could call out and reprove them , the explanation of the matter occurred to
me , and i withdrew behind a tree . oh , how they enjoyed themselves , ridiculing that
young man ! for five good minutes they stood there , shouting ribaldry at him , deriding
him , mocking him , jeering at him . they peppered him with stale jokes , they even made a
few new ones and threw at him . they hurled at him all the private family jokes belonging
to our set , and which must have been perfectly unintelligible to him . and then , unable
to stand their brutal jibes any longer , he turned round on them , and they saw his face !
i was glad to notice that they had sufficient decency left in them to look very foolish .
they explained to him that they had thought he was some one they knew . they said they
hoped he would not deem them capable of so insulting any one except a personal friend of
their own . of course their having mistaken him for a friend excused it . i remember
harris telling me once of a bathing experience he had at boulogne . he was swimming about
there near the beach , when he felt himself suddenly seized by the neck from behind , and
forcibly plunged under water . he struggled violently , but whoever had got hold of him
seemed to be a perfect hercules in strength , and all his efforts to escape were
unavailing . he had given up kicking , and was trying to turn his thoughts upon solemn
things , when his captor released him . he regained his feet , and looked round for his

121
would-be murderer . the assassin was standing close by him , laughing heartily , but the
moment he caught sight of harris's face , as it emerged from the water , he started back
and seemed quite concerned . i really beg your pardon , he stammered confusedly , but i
took you for a friend of mine ! harris thought it was lucky for him the man had not
mistaken him for a relation , or he would probably have been drowned outright . sailing is
a thing that wants knowledge and practice too -- though , as a boy , i did not think so .
i had an idea it came natural to a body , like rounders and touch . i knew another boy who
held this view likewise , and so , one windy day , we thought we would try the sport . we
were stopping down at yarmouth , and we decided we would go for a trip up the yare . we
hired a sailing boat at the yard by the bridge , and started off . it's rather a rough day
, said the man to us , as we put off : better take in a reef and luff sharp when you get
round the bend . we said we would make a point of it , and left him with a cheery
good-morning , wondering to ourselves how you luffed , and where we were to get a reef
from , and what we were to do with it when we had got it . we rowed until we were out of
sight of the town , and then , with a wide stretch of water in front of us , and the wind
blowing a perfect hurricane across it , we felt that the time had come to commence
operations . hector -- i think that was his name -- went on pulling while i unrolled the
sail . it seemed a complicated job , but i accomplished it at length , and then came the
question , which was the top end ? by a sort of natural instinct , we , of course ,
eventually decided that the bottom was the top , and set to work to fix it upside-down .
but it was a long time before we could get it up , either that way or any other way . the
impression on the mind of the sail seemed to be that we were playing at funerals , and
that i was the corpse and itself was the winding-sheet . when it found that this was not
the idea , it hit me over the head with the boom , and refused to do anything . wet it ,
said hector ; drop it over and get it wet . he said people in ships always wetted the
sails before they put them up . so i wetted it ; but that only made matters worse than
they were before . a dry sail clinging to your legs and wrapping itself round your head is
not pleasant , but , when the sail is sopping wet , it becomes quite vexing . we did get

122
the thing up at last , the two of us together . we fixed it , not exactly upside down --
more sideways like -- and we tied it up to the mast with the painter , which we cut off
for the purpose . that the boat did not upset i simply state as a fact . why it did not
upset i am unable to offer any reason . i have often thought about the matter since , but
i have never succeeded in arriving at any satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon .
possibly the result may have been brought about by the natural obstinacy of all things in
this world . the boat may possibly have come to the conclusion , judging from a cursory
view of our behaviour , that we had come out for a morning's suicide , and had thereupon
determined to disappoint us . that is the only suggestion i can offer . by clinging like
grim death to the gunwale , we just managed to keep inside the boat , but it was
exhausting work . hector said that pirates and other seafaring people generally lashed the
rudder to something or other , and hauled in the main top-jib , during severe squalls ,
and thought we ought to try to do something of the kind ; but i was for letting her have
her head to the wind . as my advice was by far the easiest to follow , we ended by
adopting it , and contrived to embrace the gunwale and give her her head . the boat
travelled up stream for about a mile at a pace i have never sailed at since , and don't
want to again . then , at a bend , she heeled over till half her sail was under water .
then she righted herself by a miracle and flew for a long low bank of soft mud . that
mud-bank saved us . the boat ploughed its way into the middle of it and then stuck .
finding that we were once more able to move according to our ideas , instead of being
pitched and thrown about like peas in a bladder , we crept forward , and cut down the sail
. we had had enough sailing . we did not want to overdo the thing and get a surfeit of it
. we had had a sail -- a good all-round exciting , interesting sail -- and now we thought
we would have a row , just for a change like . we took the sculls and tried to push the
boat off the mud , and , in doing so , we broke one of the sculls . after that we
proceeded with great caution , but they were a wretched old pair , and the second one
cracked almost easier than the first , and left us helpless . the mud stretched out for
about a hundred yards in front of us , and behind us was the water . the only thing to be

123
done was to sit and wait until someone came by . it was not the sort of day to attract
people out on the river , and it was three hours before a soul came in sight . it was an
old fisherman who , with immense difficulty , at last rescued us , and we were towed back
in an ignominious fashion to the boat-yard . what between tipping the man who had brought
us home , and paying for the broken sculls , and for having been out four hours and a half
, it cost us a pretty considerable number of weeks' pocket-money , that sail . but we
learned experience , and they say that is always cheap at any price . we came in sight of
reading about eleven . the river is dirty and dismal here . one does not linger in the
neighbourhood of reading . the town itself is a famous old place , dating from the dim
days of king ethelred , when the danes anchored their warships in the kennet , and started
from reading to ravage all the land of wessex ; and here ethelred and his brother alfred
fought and defeated them , ethelred doing the praying and alfred the fighting . in later
years , reading seems to have been regarded as a handy place to run down to , when matters
were becoming unpleasant in london . parliament generally rushed off to reading whenever
there was a plague on at westminster ; and , in 1625 , the law followed suit , and all the
courts were held at reading . it must have been worth while having a mere ordinary plague
now and then in london to get rid of both the lawyers and the parliament . during the
parliamentary struggle , reading was besieged by the earl of essex , and , a quarter of a
century later , the prince of orange routed king james's troops there . henry i . lies
buried at reading , in the benedictine abbey founded by him there , the ruins of which may
still be seen ; and , in this same abbey , great john of gaunt was married to the lady
blanche . at reading lock we came up with a steam launch , belonging to some friends of
mine , and they towed us up to within about a mile of streatley . it is very delightful
being towed up by a launch . i prefer it myself to rowing . the run would have been more
delightful still , if it had not been for a lot of wretched small boats that were
continually getting in the way of our launch , and , to avoid running down which , we had
to be continually easing and stopping . it is really most annoying , the manner in which
these rowing boats get in the way of one's launch up the river ; something ought to done

124
to stop it . and they are so confoundedly impertinent , too , over it . you can whistle
till you nearly burst your boiler before they will trouble themselves to hurry . i would
have one or two of them run down now and then , if i had my way , just to teach them all a
lesson . the river becomes very lovely from a little above reading . the railway rather
spoils it near tilehurst , but from mapledurham up to streatley it is glorious . a little
above mapledurham lock you pass hardwick house , where charles i . played bowls . the
neighbourhood of pangbourne , where the quaint little swan inn stands , must be as
familiar to the habitues of the art exhibitions as it is to its own inhabitants . my
friends' launch cast us loose just below the grotto , and then harris wanted to make out
that it was my turn to pull . this seemed to me most unreasonable . it had been arranged
in the morning that i should bring the boat up to three miles above reading . well , here
we were , ten miles above reading ! surely it was now their turn again . i could not get
either george or harris to see the matter in its proper light , however ; so , to save
argument , i took the sculls . i had not been pulling for more than a minute or so , when
george noticed something black floating on the water , and we drew up to it . george leant
over , as we neared it , and laid hold of it . and then he drew back with a cry , and a
blanched face . it was the dead body of a woman . it lay very lightly on the water , and
the face was sweet and calm . it was not a beautiful face ; it was too prematurely
aged-looking , too thin and drawn , to be that ; but it was a gentle , lovable face , in
spite of its stamp of pinch and poverty , and upon it was that look of restful peace that
comes to the faces of the sick sometimes when at last the pain has left them . fortunately
for us -- we having no desire to be kept hanging about coroners' courts -- some men on the
bank had seen the body too , and now took charge of it from us . we found out the woman's
story afterwards . of course it was the old , old vulgar tragedy . she had loved and been
deceived -- or had deceived herself . anyhow , she had sinned -- some of us do now and
then -- and her family and friends , naturally shocked and indignant , had closed their
doors against her . left to fight the world alone , with the millstone of her shame around
her neck , she had sunk ever lower and lower . for a while she had kept both herself and

125
the child on the twelve shillings a week that twelve hours' drudgery a day procured her ,
paying six shillings out of it for the child , and keeping her own body and soul together
on the remainder . six shillings a week does not keep body and soul together very unitedly
. they want to get away from each other when there is only such a very slight bond as that
between them ; and one day , i suppose , the pain and the dull monotony of it all had
stood before her eyes plainer than usual , and the mocking spectre had frightened her .
she had made one last appeal to friends , but , against the chill wall of their
respectability , the voice of the erring outcast fell unheeded ; and then she had gone to
see her child -- had held it in her arms and kissed it , in a weary , dull sort of way ,
and without betraying any particular emotion of any kind , and had left it , after putting
into its hand a penny box of chocolate she had bought it , and afterwards , with her last
few shillings , had taken a ticket and come down to goring . it seemed that the bitterest
thoughts of her life must have centred about the wooded reaches and the bright green
meadows around goring ; but women strangely hug the knife that stabs them , and , perhaps
, amidst the gall , there may have mingled also sunny memories of sweetest hours , spent
upon those shadowed deeps over which the great trees bend their branches down so low . she
had wandered about the woods by the river's brink all day , and then , when evening fell
and the grey twilight spread its dusky robe upon the waters , she stretched her arms out
to the silent river that had known her sorrow and her joy . and the old river had taken
her into its gentle arms , and had laid her weary head upon its bosom , and had hushed
away the pain . thus had she sinned in all things -- sinned in living and in dying . god
help her ! and all other sinners , if any more there be . goring on the left bank and
streatley on the right are both or either charming places to stay at for a few days . the
reaches down to pangbourne woo one for a sunny sail or for a moonlight row , and the
country round about is full of beauty . we had intended to push on to wallingford that day
, but the sweet smiling face of the river here lured us to linger for a while ; and so we
left our boat at the bridge , and went up into streatley , and lunched at the bull , much
to montmorency's satisfaction . they say that the hills on each ride of the stream here

126
once joined and formed a barrier across what is now the thames , and that then the river
ended there above goring in one vast lake . i am not in a position either to contradict or
affirm this statement . i simply offer it . it is an ancient place , streatley , dating
back , like most river-side towns and villages , to british and saxon times . goring is
not nearly so pretty a little spot to stop at as streatley , if you have your choice ; but
it is passing fair enough in its way , and is nearer the railway in case you want to slip
off without paying your hotel bill . we stayed two days at streatley , and got our clothes
washed . we had tried washing them ourselves , in the river , under george's
superintendence , and it had been a failure . indeed , it had been more than a failure ,
because we were worse off after we had washed our clothes than we were before . before we
had washed them , they had been very , very dirty , it is true ; but they were just
wearable . after we had washed them -- well , the river between reading and henley was
much cleaner , after we had washed our clothes in it , than it was before . all the dirt
contained in the river between reading and henley , we collected , during that wash , and
worked it into our clothes . the washerwoman at streatley said she felt she owed it to
herself to charge us just three times the usual prices for that wash . she said it had not
been like washing , it had been more in the nature of excavating . we paid the bill
without a murmur . the neighbourhood of streatley and goring is a great fishing centre .
there is some excellent fishing to be had here . the river abounds in pike , roach , dace
, gudgeon , and eels , just here ; and you can sit and fish for them all day . some people
do . they never catch them . i never knew anybody catch anything , up the thames , except
minnows and dead cats , but that has nothing to do , of course , with fishing ! the local
fisherman's guide doesn't say a word about catching anything . all it says is the place is
a good station for fishing ; and , from what i have seen of the district , i am quite
prepared to bear out this statement . there is no spot in the world where you can get more
fishing , or where you can fish for a longer period . some fishermen come here and fish
for a day , and others stop and fish for a month . you can hang on and fish for a year ,
if you want to : it will be all the same . the angler's guide to the thames says that jack

127
and perch are also to be had about here , but there the angler's guide is wrong . jack and
perch may be about there . indeed , i know for a fact that they are . you can see them
there in shoals , when you are out for a walk along the banks : they come and stand half
out of the water with their mouths open for biscuits . and , if you go for a bathe , they
crowd round , and get in your way , and irritate you . but they are not to be had by a bit
of worm on the end of a hook , nor anything like it -- not they ! i am not a good
fisherman myself . i devoted a considerable amount of attention to the subject at one time
, and was getting on , as i thought , fairly well ; but the old hands told me that i
should never be any real good at it , and advised me to give it up . they said that i was
an extremely neat thrower , and that i seemed to have plenty of gumption for the thing ,
and quite enough constitutional laziness . but they were sure i should never make anything
of a fisherman . i had not got sufficient imagination . they said that as a poet , or a
shilling shocker , or a reporter , or anything of that kind , i might be satisfactory ,
but that , to gain any position as a thames angler , would require more play of fancy ,
more power of invention than i appeared to possess . some people are under the impression
that all that is required to make a good fisherman is the ability to tell lies easily and
without blushing ; but this is a mistake . mere bald fabrication is useless ; the veriest
tyro can manage that . it is in the circumstantial detail , the embellishing touches of
probability , the general air of scrupulous -- almost of pedantic -- veracity , that the
experienced angler is seen . anybody can come in and say , oh , i caught fifteen dozen
perch yesterday evening ; or last monday i landed a gudgeon , weighing eighteen pounds ,
and measuring three feet from the tip to the tail . there is no art , no skill , required
for that sort of thing . it shows pluck , but that is all . no ; your accomplished angler
would scorn to tell a lie , that way . his method is a study in itself . he comes in
quietly with his hat on , appropriates the most comfortable chair , lights his pipe , and
commences to puff in silence . he lets the youngsters brag away for a while , and then ,
during a momentary lull , he removes the pipe from his mouth , and remarks , as he knocks
the ashes out against the bars : well , i had a haul on tuesday evening that it's not much

128
good my telling anybody about . oh ! why's that ? they ask . because i don't expect
anybody would believe me if i did , replies the old fellow calmly , and without even a
tinge of bitterness in his tone , as he refills his pipe , and requests the landlord to
bring him three of scotch , cold . there is a pause after this , nobody feeling
sufficiently sure of himself to contradict the old gentleman . so he has to go on by
himself without any encouragement . no , he continues thoughtfully ; i shouldn't believe
it myself if anybody told it to me , but it's a fact , for all that . i had been sitting
there all the afternoon and had caught literally nothing -- except a few dozen dace and a
score of jack ; and i was just about giving it up as a bad job when i suddenly felt a
rather smart pull at the line . i thought it was another little one , and i went to jerk
it up . hang me , if i could move the rod ! it took me half-an-hour -- half-an-hour , sir
! -- to land that fish ; and every moment i thought the line was going to snap ! i reached
him at last , and what do you think it was ? a sturgeon ! a forty pound sturgeon ! taken
on a line , sir ! yes , you may well look surprised -- i'll have another three of scotch ,
landlord , please . and then he goes on to tell of the astonishment of everybody who saw
it ; and what his wife said , when he got home , and of what joe buggles thought about it
. i asked the landlord of an inn up the river once , if it did not injure him , sometimes
, listening to the tales that the fishermen about there told him ; and he said : oh , no ;
not now , sir . it did used to knock me over a bit at first , but , lor love you ! me and
the missus we listens to 'em all day now . it's what you're used to , you know . it's what
you're used to . i knew a young man once , he was a most conscientious fellow , and , when
he took to fly-fishing , he determined never to exaggerate his hauls by more than
twenty-five per cent . when i have caught forty fish , said he , then i will tell people
that i have caught fifty , and so on . but i will not lie any more than that , because it
is sinful to lie . but the twenty-five per cent . plan did not work well at all . he never
was able to use it . the greatest number of fish he ever caught in one day was three , and
you can't add twenty-five per cent . to three -- at least , not in fish . so he increased
his percentage to thirty-three-and-a-third ; but that , again , was awkward , when he had

129
only caught one or two ; so , to simplify matters , he made up his mind to just double the
quantity . he stuck to this arrangement for a couple of months , and then he grew
dissatisfied with it . nobody believed him when he told them that he only doubled , and he
, therefore , gained no credit that way whatever , while his moderation put him at a
disadvantage among the other anglers . when he had really caught three small fish , and
said he had caught six , it used to make him quite jealous to hear a man , whom he knew
for a fact had only caught one , going about telling people he had landed two dozen . so ,
eventually , he made one final arrangement with himself , which he has religiously held to
ever since , and that was to count each fish that he caught as ten , and to assume ten to
begin with . for example , if he did not catch any fish at all , then he said he had
caught ten fish -- you could never catch less than ten fish by his system ; that was the
foundation of it . then , if by any chance he really did catch one fish , he called it
twenty , while two fish would count thirty , three forty , and so on . it is a simple and
easily worked plan , and there has been some talk lately of its being made use of by the
angling fraternity in general . indeed , the committee of the thames angler's association
did recommend its adoption about two years ago , but some of the older members opposed it
. they said they would consider the idea if the number were doubled , and each fish
counted as twenty . if ever you have an evening to spare , up the river , i should advise
you to drop into one of the little village inns , and take a seat in the tap-room . you
will be nearly sure to meet one or two old rod-men , sipping their toddy there , and they
will tell you enough fishy stories , in half an hour , to give you indigestion for a month
. george and i -- i don't know what had become of harris ; he had gone out and had a shave
, early in the afternoon , and had then come back and spent full forty minutes in
pipeclaying his shoes , we had not seen him since -- george and i , therefore , and the
dog , left to ourselves , went for a walk to wallingford on the second evening , and ,
coming home , we called in at a little river-side inn , for a rest , and other things . we
went into the parlour and sat down . there was an old fellow there , smoking a long clay
pipe , and we naturally began chatting . he told us that it had been a fine day to-day ,

130
and we told him that it had been a fine day yesterday , and then we all told each other
that we thought it would be a fine day to-morrow ; and george said the crops seemed to be
coming up nicely . after that it came out , somehow or other , that we were strangers in
the neighbourhood , and that we were going away the next morning . then a pause ensued in
the conversation , during which our eyes wandered round the room . they finally rested
upon a dusty old glass-case , fixed very high up above the chimney-piece , and containing
a trout . it rather fascinated me , that trout ; it was such a monstrous fish . in fact ,
at first glance , i thought it was a cod . ah ! said the old gentleman , following the
direction of my gaze , fine fellow that , ain't he ? quite uncommon , i murmured ; and
george asked the old man how much he thought it weighed . eighteen pounds six ounces ,
said our friend , rising and taking down his coat . yes , he continued , it wur sixteen
year ago , come the third o' next month , that i landed him . i caught him just below the
bridge with a minnow . they told me he wur in the river , and i said i'd have him , and so
i did . you don't see many fish that size about here now , i'm thinking . good-night ,
gentlemen , good-night . and out he went , and left us alone . we could not take our eyes
off the fish after that . it really was a remarkably fine fish . we were still looking at
it , when the local carrier , who had just stopped at the inn , came to the door of the
room with a pot of beer in his hand , and he also looked at the fish . good-sized trout ,
that , said george , turning round to him . ah ! you may well say that , sir , replied the
man ; and then , after a pull at his beer , he added , maybe you wasn't here , sir , when
that fish was caught ? no , we told him . we were strangers in the neighbourhood . ah !
said the carrier , then , of course , how should you ? it was nearly five years ago that i
caught that trout . oh ! was it you who caught it , then ? said i . yes , sir , replied
the genial old fellow . i caught him just below the lock -- leastways , what was the lock
then -- one friday afternoon ; and the remarkable thing about it is that i caught him with
a fly . i'd gone out pike fishing , bless you , never thinking of a trout , and when i saw
that whopper on the end of my line , blest if it didn't quite take me aback . well , you
see , he weighed twenty-six pound . good-night , gentlemen , good-night . five minutes

131
afterwards , a third man came in , and described how he had caught it early one morning ,
with bleak ; and then he left , and a stolid , solemn-looking , middle-aged individual
came in , and sat down over by the window . none of us spoke for a while ; but , at length
, george turned to the new comer , and said : i beg your pardon , i hope you will forgive
the liberty that we -- perfect strangers in the neighbourhood -- are taking , but my
friend here and myself would be so much obliged if you would tell us how you caught that
trout up there . why , who told you i caught that trout ! was the surprised query . we
said that nobody had told us so , but somehow or other we felt instinctively that it was
he who had done it . well , it's a most remarkable thing -- most remarkable , answered the
stolid stranger , laughing ; because , as a matter of fact , you are quite right . i did
catch it . but fancy your guessing it like that . dear me , it's really a most remarkable
thing . and then he went on , and told us how it had taken him half an hour to land it ,
and how it had broken his rod . he said he had weighed it carefully when he reached home ,
and it had turned the scale at thirty-four pounds . he went in his turn , and when he was
gone , the landlord came in to us . we told him the various histories we had heard about
his trout , and he was immensely amused , and we all laughed very heartily . fancy jim
bates and joe muggles and mr . jones and old billy maunders all telling you that they had
caught it . ha ! ha ! ha ! well , that is good , said the honest old fellow , laughing
heartily . yes , they are the sort to give it me , to put up in my parlour , if they had
caught it , they are ! ha ! ha ! ha ! and then he told us the real history of the fish .
it seemed that he had caught it himself , years ago , when he was quite a lad ; not by any
art or skill , but by that unaccountable luck that appears to always wait upon a boy when
he plays the wag from school , and goes out fishing on a sunny afternoon , with a bit of
string tied on to the end of a tree . he said that bringing home that trout had saved him
from a whacking , and that even his school-master had said it was worth the rule-of-three
and practice put together . he was called out of the room at this point , and george and i
again turned our gaze upon the fish . it really was a most astonishing trout . the more we
looked at it , the more we marvelled at it . it excited george so much that he climbed up

132
CHAPTER 12

on the back of a chair to get a better view of it . and then the chair slipped , and
george clutched wildly at the trout-case to save himself , and down it came with a crash ,
george and the chair on top of it . you haven't injured the fish , have you ? i cried in
alarm , rushing up . i hope not , said george , rising cautiously and looking about . but
he had . that trout lay shattered into a thousand fragments -- i say a thousand , but they
may have only been nine hundred . i did not count them . we thought it strange and
unaccountable that a stuffed trout should break up into little pieces like that . and so
it would have been strange and unaccountable , if it had been a stuffed trout , but it was
not . that trout was plaster-of-paris . we left streatley early the next morning , and
pulled up to culham , and slept under the canvas , in the backwater there . the river is
not extraordinarily interesting between streatley and wallingford . from cleve you get a
stretch of six and a half miles without a lock . i believe this is the longest
uninterrupted stretch anywhere above teddington , and the oxford club make use of it for
their trial eights . but however satisfactory this absence of locks may be to rowing-men ,
it is to be regretted by the mere pleasure-seeker . for myself , i am fond of locks . they
pleasantly break the monotony of the pull . i like sitting in the boat and slowly rising
out of the cool depths up into new reaches and fresh views ; or sinking down , as it were
, out of the world , and then waiting , while the gloomy gates creak , and the narrow
strip of day-light between them widens till the fair smiling river lies full before you ,
and you push your little boat out from its brief prison on to the welcoming waters once
again . they are picturesque little spots , these locks . the stout old lock-keeper , or
his cheerful-looking wife , or bright-eyed daughter , are pleasant folk to have a passing
chat with . 287 you meet other boats there , and river gossip is exchanged . the thames
would not be the fairyland it is without its flower-decked locks . talking of locks
reminds me of an accident george and i very nearly had one summer's morning at hampton
court . it was a glorious day , and the lock was crowded ; and , as is a common practice

133
up the river , a speculative photographer was taking a picture of us all as we lay upon
the rising waters . i did not catch what was going on at first , and was , therefore ,
extremely surprised at noticing george hurriedly smooth out his trousers , ruffle up his
hair , and stick his cap on in a rakish manner at the back of his head , and then ,
assuming an expression of mingled affability and sadness , sit down in a graceful attitude
, and try to hide his feet . my first idea was that he had suddenly caught sight of some
girl he knew , and i looked about to see who it was . everybody in the lock seemed to have
been suddenly struck wooden . they were all standing or sitting about in the most quaint
and curious attitudes i have ever seen off a japanese fan . all the girls were smiling .
oh , they did look so sweet ! and all the fellows were frowning , and looking stern and
noble . and then , at last , the truth flashed across me , and i wondered if i should be
in time . ours was the first boat , and it would be unkind of me to spoil the man's
picture , i thought . so i faced round quickly , and took up a position in the prow ,
where i leant with careless grace upon the hitcher , in an attitude suggestive of agility
and strength . i arranged my hair with a curl over the forehead , and threw an air of
tender wistfulness into my expression , mingled with a touch of cynicism , which i am told
suits me . as we stood , waiting for the eventful moment , i heard someone behind call out
: hi ! look at your nose . i could not turn round to see what was the matter , and whose
nose it was that was to be looked at . i stole a side-glance at george's nose ! it was all
right -- at all events , there was nothing wrong with it that could be altered . i
squinted down at my own , and that seemed all that could be expected also . look at your
nose , you stupid ass ! came the same voice again , louder . and then another voice cried
: push your nose out , can't you , you -- you two with the dog ! neither george nor i
dared to turn round . the man's hand was on the cap , and the picture might be taken any
moment . was it us they were calling to ? what was the matter with our noses ? why were
they to be pushed out ! but now the whole lock started yelling , and a stentorian voice
from the back shouted : look at your boat , sir ; you in the red and black caps . it's
your two corpses that will get taken in that photo , if you ain't quick . we looked then ,

134
and saw that the nose of our boat had got fixed under the woodwork of the lock , while the
in-coming water was rising all around it , and tilting it up . in another moment we should
be over . quick as thought , we each seized an oar , and a vigorous blow against the side
of the lock with the butt-ends released the boat , and sent us sprawling on our backs . we
did not come out well in that photograph , george and i . of course , as was to be
expected , our luck ordained it , that the man should set his wretched machine in motion
at the precise moment that we were both lying on our backs with a wild expression of where
am i ? and what is it ? on our faces , and our four feet waving madly in the air . our
feet were undoubtedly the leading article in that photograph . indeed , very little else
was to be seen . they filled up the foreground entirely . behind them , you caught
glimpses of the other boats , and bits of the surrounding scenery ; but everything and
everybody else in the lock looked so utterly insignificant and paltry compared with our
feet , that all the other people felt quite ashamed of themselves , and refused to
subscribe to the picture . the owner of one steam launch , who had bespoke six copies ,
rescinded the order on seeing the negative . he said he would take them if anybody could
show him his launch , but nobody could . it was somewhere behind george's right foot .
there was a good deal of unpleasantness over the business . the photographer thought we
ought to take a dozen copies each , seeing that the photo was about nine-tenths us , but
we declined . we said we had no objection to being photo'd full-length , but we preferred
being taken the right way up . wallingford , six miles above streatley , is a very ancient
town , and has been an active centre for the making of english history . it was a rude ,
mud-built town in the time of the britons , who squatted there , until the roman legions
evicted them ; and replaced their clay-baked walls by mighty fortifications , the trace of
which time has not yet succeeded in sweeping away , so well those old-world masons knew
how to build . but time , though he halted at roman walls , soon crumbled romans to dust ;
and on the ground , in later years , fought savage saxons and huge danes , until the
normans came . it was a walled and fortified town up to the time of the parliamentary war
, when it suffered a long and bitter siege from fairfax . it fell at last , and then the

135
walls were razed . from wallingford up to dorchester the neighbourhood of the river grows
more hilly , varied , and picturesque . dorchester stands half a mile from the river . it
can be reached by paddling up the thame , if you have a small boat ; but the best way is
to leave the river at day's lock , and take a walk across the fields . dorchester is a
delightfully peaceful old place , nestling in stillness and silence and drowsiness .
dorchester , like wallingford , was a city in ancient british times ; it was then called
caer doren , the city on the water . in more recent times the romans formed a great camp
here , the fortifications surrounding which now seem like low , even hills . in saxon days
it was the capital of wessex . it is very old , and it was very strong and great once .
now it sits aside from the stirring world , and nods and dreams . round clifton hampden ,
itself a wonderfully pretty village , old-fashioned , peaceful , and dainty with flowers ,
the river scenery is rich and beautiful . if you stay the night on land at clifton , you
cannot do better than put up at the barley mow . it is , without exception , i should say
, the quaintest , most old-world inn up the river . it stands on the right of the bridge ,
quite away from the village . its low-pitched gables and thatched roof and latticed
windows give it quite a story-book appearance , while inside it is even still more
once-upon-a-timeyfied . it would not be a good place for the heroine of a modern novel to
stay at . the heroine of a modern novel is always divinely tall , and she is ever drawing
herself up to her full height . at the barley mow she would bump her head against the
ceiling each time she did this . it would also be a bad house for a drunken man to put up
at . there are too many surprises in the way of unexpected steps down into this room and
up into that ; and as for getting upstairs to his bedroom , or ever finding his bed when
he got up , either operation would be an utter impossibility to him . we were up early the
next morning , as we wanted to be in oxford by the afternoon . it is surprising how early
one can get up , when camping out . one does not yearn for just another five minutes
nearly so much , lying wrapped up in a rug on the boards of a boat , with a gladstone bag
for a pillow , as one does in a featherbed . we had finished breakfast , and were through
clifton lock by half-past eight . from clifton to culham the river banks are flat ,

136
monotonous , and uninteresting , but , after you get through culhalm lock -- the coldest
and deepest lock on the river -- the landscape improves . at abingdon , the river passes
by the streets . abingdon is a typical country town of the smaller order -- quiet ,
eminently respectable , clean , and desperately dull . it prides itself on being old , but
whether it can compare in this respect with wallingford and dorchester seems doubtful . a
famous abbey stood here once , and within what is left of its sanctified walls they brew
bitter ale nowadays . in st . nicholas church , at abingdon , there is a monument to john
blackwall and his wife jane , who both , after leading a happy married life , died on the
very same day , august 21 , 1625 ; and in st . helen's church , it is recorded that w .
lee , who died in 1637 , had in his lifetime issue from his loins two hundred lacking but
three . if you work this out you will find that mr . w . lee's family numbered one hundred
and ninety-seven . mr . w . lee -- five times mayor of abingdon -- was , no doubt , a
benefactor to his generation , but i hope there are not many of his kind about in this
overcrowded nineteenth century . from abingdon to nuneham courteney is a lovely stretch .
nuneham park is well worth a visit . it can be viewed on tuesdays and thursdays . the
house contains a fine collection of pictures and curiosities , and the grounds are very
beautiful . the pool under sandford lasher , just behind the lock , is a very good place
to drown yourself in . the undercurrent is terribly strong , and if you once get down into
it you are all right . an obelisk marks the spot where two men have already been drowned ,
while bathing there ; and the steps of the obelisk are generally used as a diving-board by
young men now who wish to see if the place really is dangerous . iffley lock and mill , a
mile before you reach oxford , is a favourite subject with the river-loving brethren of
the brush . the real article , however , is rather disappointing , after the pictures .
few things , i have noticed , come quite up to the pictures of them , in this world . we
passed through iffley lock at about half-past twelve , and then , having tidied up the
boat and made all ready for landing , we set to work on our last mile . between iffley and
oxford is the most difficult bit of the river i know . you want to be born on that bit of
water , to understand it . i have been over it a fairish number of times , but i have

137
never been able to get the hang of it . the man who could row a straight course from
oxford to iffley ought to be able to live comfortably , under one roof , with his wife ,
his mother-in-law , his elder sister , and the old servant who was in the family when he
was a baby . first the current drives you on to the right bank , and then on to the left ,
then it takes you out into the middle , turns you round three times , and carries you up
stream again , and always ends by trying to smash you up against a college barge . of
course , as a consequence of this , we got in the way of a good many other boats , during
the mile , and they in ours , and , of course , as a consequence of that , a good deal of
bad language occurred . i don't know why it should be , but everybody is always so
exceptionally irritable on the river . little mishaps , that you would hardly notice on
dry land , drive you nearly frantic with rage , when they occur on the water . when harris
or george makes an ass of himself on dry land , i smile indulgently ; when they behave in
a chuckle-head way on the river , i use the most blood-curdling language to them . when
another boat gets in my way , i feel i want to take an oar and kill all the people in it .
the mildest tempered people , when on land , become violent and blood-thirsty when in a
boat . i did a little boating once with a young lady . she was naturally of the sweetest
and gentlest disposition imaginable , but on the river it was quite awful to hear her . oh
, drat the man ! she would exclaim , when some unfortunate sculler would get in her way ;
why don't he look where he's going ? and , oh , bother the silly old thing ! she would say
indignantly , when the sail would not go up properly . and she would catch hold of it ,
and shake it quite brutally . yet , as i have said , when on shore she was kind-hearted
and amiable enough . the air of the river has a demoralising effect upon one's temper ,
and this it is , i suppose , which causes even barge men to be sometimes rude to one
another , and to use language which , no doubt , in their calmer moments they regret . we
spent two very pleasant days at oxford . there are plenty of dogs in the town of oxford .
montmorency had eleven fights on the first day , and fourteen on the second , and
evidently thought he had got to heaven . among folk too constitutionally weak , or too
constitutionally lazy , whichever it may be , to relish up-stream work , it is a common

138
practice to get a boat at oxford , and row down . for the energetic , however , the
up-stream journey is certainly to be preferred . it does not seem good to be always going
with the current . there is more satisfaction in squaring one's back , and fighting
against it , and winning one's way forward in spite of it -- at least , so i feel , when
harris and george are sculling and i am steering . to those who do contemplate making
oxford their starting-place , i would say , take your own boat -- unless , of course , you
can take someone else's without any possible danger of being found out . the boats that ,
as a rule , are let for hire on the thames above marlow , are very good boats . they are
fairly water-tight ; and so long as they are handled with care , they rarely come to
pieces , or sink . there are places in them to sit down on , and they are complete with
all the necessary arrangements -- or nearly all -- to enable you to row them and steer
them . but they are not ornamental . the boat you hire up the river above marlow is not
the sort of boat in which you can flash about and give yourself airs . the hired up-river
boat very soon puts a stop to any nonsense of that sort on the part of its occupants .
that is its chief -- one may say , its only recommendation . the man in the hired up-river
boat is modest and retiring . he likes to keep on the shady side , underneath the trees ,
and to do most of his travelling early in the morning or late at night , when there are
not many people about on the river to look at him . when the man in the hired up-river
boat sees anyone he knows , he gets out on to the bank , and hides behind a tree . i was
one of a party who hired an up-river boat one summer , for a few days' trip . we had none
of us ever seen the hired up-river boat before ; and we did not know what it was when we
did see it . we had written for a boat -- a double sculling skiff ; and when we went down
with our bags to the yard , and gave our names , the man said : oh , yes ; you're the
party that wrote for a double sculling skiff . it's all right . jim , fetch round the
pride of the thames . the boy went , and re-appeared five minutes afterwards , struggling
with an antediluvian chunk of wood , that looked as though it had been recently dug out of
somewhere , and dug out carelessly , so as to have been unnecessarily damaged in the
process . my own idea , on first catching sight of the object , was that it was a roman

139
relic of some sort , -- relic of what i do not know , possibly of a coffin . the
neighbourhood of the upper thames is rich in roman relics , and my surmise seemed to me a
very probable one ; but our serious young man , who is a bit of a geologist , pooh-poohed
my roman relic theory , and said it was clear to the meanest intellect in which category
he seemed to be grieved that he could not conscientiously include mine that the thing the
boy had found was the fossil of a whale ; and he pointed out to us various evidences
proving that it must have belonged to the preglacial period . to settle the dispute , we
appealed to the boy . we told him not to be afraid , but to speak the plain truth : was it
the fossil of a pre-adamite whale , or was it an early roman coffin ? the boy said it was
the pride of the thames . we thought this a very humorous answer on the part of the boy at
first , and somebody gave him twopence as a reward for his ready wit ; but when he
persisted in keeping up the joke , as we thought , too long , we got vexed with him . come
, come , my lad ! said our captain sharply , don't let us have any nonsense . you take
your mother's washing-tub home again , and bring us a boat . the boat-builder himself came
up then , and assured us , on his word , as a practical man , that the thing really was a
boat -- was , in fact , the boat , the double sculling skiff selected to take us on our
trip down the river . we grumbled a good deal . we thought he might , at least , have had
it whitewashed or tarred -- had something done to it to distinguish it from a bit of a
wreck ; but he could not see any fault in it . he even seemed offended at our remarks . he
said he had picked us out the best boat in all his stock , and he thought we might have
been more grateful . he said it , the pride of the thames , had been in use , just as it
now stood or rather as it now hung together , for the last forty years , to his knowledge
, and nobody had complained of it before , and he did not see why we should be the first
to begin . we argued no more . we fastened the so-called boat together with some pieces of
string , got a bit of wall-paper and pasted over the shabbier places , said our prayers ,
and stepped on board . they charged us thirty-five shillings for the loan of the remnant
for six days ; and we could have bought the thing out-and-out for four-and-sixpence at any
sale of drift-wood round the coast . the weather changed on the third day , -- oh ! i am

140
talking about our present trip now , -- and we started from oxford upon our homeward
journey in the midst of a steady drizzle . the river -- with the sunlight flashing from
its dancing wavelets , gilding gold the grey-green beech-trunks , glinting through the
dark , cool wood paths , chasing shadows o'er the shallows , flinging diamonds from the
mill-wheels , throwing kisses to the lilies , wantoning with the weirs' white waters ,
silvering moss-grown walls and bridges , brightening every tiny townlet , making sweet
each lane and meadow , lying tangled in the rushes , peeping , laughing , from each inlet
, gleaming gay on many a far sail , making soft the air with glory -- is a golden fairy
stream . but the river -- chill and weary , with the ceaseless rain-drops falling on its
brown and sluggish waters , with a sound as of a woman , weeping low in some dark chamber
; while the woods , all dark and silent , shrouded in their mists of vapour , stand like
ghosts upon the margin ; silent ghosts with eyes reproachful , like the ghosts of evil
actions , like the ghosts of friends neglected -- is a spirit-haunted water through the
land of vain regrets . sunlight is the life-blood of nature . mother earth looks at us
with such dull , soulless eyes , when the sunlight has died away from out of her . it
makes us sad to be with her then ; she does not seem to know us or to care for us . she is
as a widow who has lost the husband she loved , and her children touch her hand , and look
up into her eyes , but gain no smile from her . we rowed on all that day through the rain
, and very melancholy work it was . we pretended , at first , that we enjoyed it . we said
it was a change , and that we liked to see the river under all its different aspects . we
said we could not expect to have it all sunshine , nor should we wish it . we told each
other that nature was beautiful , even in her tears . indeed , harris and i were quite
enthusiastic about the business , for the first few hours . and we sang a song about a
gipsy's life , and how delightful a gipsy's existence was ! -- free to storm and sunshine
, and to every wind that blew ! -- and how he enjoyed the rain , and what a lot of good it
did him ; and how he laughed at people who didn't like it . george took the fun more
soberly , and stuck to the umbrella . we hoisted the cover before we had lunch , and kept
it up all the afternoon , just leaving a little space in the bow , from which one of us

141
could paddle and keep a look-out . in this way we made nine miles , and pulled up for the
night a little below day's lock . i cannot honestly say that we had a merry evening . the
rain poured down with quiet persistency . everything in the boat was damp and clammy .
supper was not a success . cold veal pie , when you don't feel hungry , is apt to cloy . i
felt i wanted whitebait and a cutlet ; harris babbled of soles and white-sauce , and
passed the remains of his pie to montmorency , who declined it , and , apparently insulted
by the offer , went and sat over at the other end of the boat by himself . george
requested that we would not talk about these things , at all events until he had finished
his cold boiled beef without mustard . we played penny nap after supper . we played for
about an hour and a half , by the end of which time george had won fourpence -- george
always is lucky at cards -- and harris and i had lost exactly twopence each . we thought
we would give up gambling then . as harris said , it breeds an unhealthy excitement when
carried too far . george offered to go on and give us our revenge ; but harris and i
decided not to battle any further against fate . after that , we mixed ourselves some
toddy , and sat round and talked . george told us about a man he had known , who had come
up the river two years ago and who had slept out in a damp boat on just such another night
as that was , and it had given him rheumatic fever , and nothing was able to save him ,
and he had died in great agony ten days afterwards . george said he was quite a young man
, and was engaged to be married . he said it was one of the saddest things he had ever
known . and that put harris in mind of a friend of his , who had been in the volunteers ,
and who had slept out under canvas one wet night down at aldershot , on just such another
night as this , said harris ; and he had woke up in the morning a cripple for life .
harris said he would introduce us both to the man when we got back to town ; it would make
our hearts bleed to see him . this naturally led to some pleasant chat about sciatica ,
fevers , chills , lung diseases , and bronchitis ; and harris said how very awkward it
would be if one of us were taken seriously ill in the night , seeing how far away we were
from a doctor . there seemed to be a desire for something frolicksome to follow upon this
conversation , and in a weak moment i suggested that george should get out his banjo , and

142
see if he could not give us a comic song . i will say for george that he did not want any
pressing . there was no nonsense about having left his music at home , or anything of that
sort . he at once fished out his instrument , and commenced to play two lovely black eyes
. i had always regarded two lovely black eyes as rather a commonplace tune until that
evening . the rich vein of sadness that george extracted from it quite surprised me . the
desire that grew upon harris and myself , as the mournful strains progressed , was to fall
upon each other's necks and weep ; but by great effort we kept back the rising tears , and
listened to the wild yearnful melody in silence . when the chorus came we even made a
desperate effort to be merry . we re-filled our glasses and joined in ; harris , in a
voice trembling with emotion , leading , and george and i following a few words behind :
two lovely black eyes ; oh ! what a surprise ! only for telling a man he was wrong , two
-- there we broke down . the unutterable pathos of george's accompaniment to that two we
were , in our then state of depression , unable to bear . harris sobbed like a little
child , and the dog howled till i thought his heart or his jaw must surely break . george
wanted to go on with another verse . he thought that when he had got a little more into
the tune , and could throw more abandon , as it were , into the rendering , it might not
seem so sad . the feeling of the majority , however , was opposed to the experiment .
there being nothing else to do , we went to bed -- that is , we undressed ourselves , and
tossed about at the bottom of the boat for some three or four hours . after which , we
managed to get some fitful slumber until five a . m . , when we all got up and had
breakfast . the second day was exactly like the first . the rain continued to pour down ,
and we sat , wrapped up in our mackintoshes , underneath the canvas , and drifted slowly
down . one of us -- i forget which one now , but i rather think it was myself -- made a
few feeble attempts during the course of the morning to work up the old gipsy foolishness
about being children of nature and enjoying the wet ; but it did not go down well at all .
that -- i care not for the rain , not i ! was so painfully evident , as expressing the
sentiments of each of us , that to sing it seemed unnecessary . on one point we were all
agreed , and that was that , come what might , we would go through with this job to the

143
bitter end . we had come out for a fortnight's enjoyment on the river , and a fortnight's
enjoyment on the river we meant to have . if it killed us ! well , that would be a sad
thing for our friends and relations , but it could not be helped . we felt that to give in
to the weather in a climate such as ours would be a most disastrous precedent . it's only
two days more , said harris , and we are young and strong . we may get over it all right ,
after all . at about four o'clock we began to discuss our arrangements for the evening .
we were a little past goring then , and we decided to paddle on to pangbourne , and put up
there for the night . another jolly evening ! murmured george . we sat and mused on the
prospect . we should be in at pangbourne by five . we should finish dinner at , say ,
half-past six . after that we could walk about the village in the pouring rain until
bed-time ; or we could sit in a dimly-lit bar-parlour and read the almanac . why , the
alhambra would be almost more lively , said harris , venturing his head outside the cover
for a moment and taking a survey of the sky . with a little supper at the --- 311 to
follow , i added , half unconsciously . yes it's almost a pity we've made up our minds to
stick to this boat , answered harris ; and then there was silence for a while . if we
hadn't made up our minds to contract our certain deaths in this bally old coffin ,
observed george , casting a glance of intense malevolence over the boat , it might be
worth while to mention that there's a train leaves pangbourne , i know , soon after five ,
which would just land us in town in comfortable time to get a chop , and then go on to the
place you mentioned afterwards . nobody spoke . we looked at one another , and each one
seemed to see his own mean and guilty thoughts reflected in the faces of the others . in
silence , we dragged out and overhauled the gladstone . we looked up the river and down
the river ; not a soul was in sight ! twenty minutes later , three figures , followed by a
shamed-looking dog , might have been seen creeping stealthily from the boat-house at the
swan towards the railway station , dressed in the following neither neat nor gaudy costume
: black leather shoes , dirty ; suit of boating flannels , very dirty ; brown felt hat ,
much battered ; mackintosh , very wet ; umbrella . we had deceived the boatman at
pangbourne . we had not had the face to tell him that we were running away from the rain .

144
CHAPTER 13

we had left the boat , and all it contained , in his charge , with instructions that it
was to be ready for us at nine the next morning . if , we said -- if anything unforeseen
should happen , preventing our return , we would write to him . we reached paddington at
seven , and drove direct to the restaurant i have before described , where we partook of a
light meal , left montmorency , together with suggestions for a supper to be ready at
half-past ten , and then continued our way to leicester square . we attracted a good deal
of attention at the alhambra . on our presenting ourselves at the paybox we were gruffly
directed to go round to castle street , and were informed that we were half-an-hour behind
our time . we convinced the man , with some difficulty , that we were not the
world-renowned contortionists from the himalaya mountains , and he took our money and let
us pass . inside we were a still greater success . our fine bronzed countenances and
picturesque clothes were followed round the place with admiring gaze . we were the
cynosure of every eye . it was a proud moment for us all . we adjourned soon after the
first ballet , and wended our way back to the restaurant , where supper was already
awaiting us . i must confess to enjoying that supper . for about ten days we seemed to
have been living , more or less , on nothing but cold meat , cake , and bread and jam . it
had been a simple , a nutritious diet ; but there had been nothing exciting about it , and
the odour of burgundy , and the smell of french sauces , and the sight of clean napkins
and long loaves , knocked as a very welcome visitor at the door of our inner man . we
pegged and quaffed away in silence for a while , until the time came when , instead of
sitting bolt upright , and grasping the knife and fork firmly , we leant back in our
chairs and worked slowly and carelessly -- when we stretched out our legs beneath the
table , let our napkins fall , unheeded , to the floor , and found time to more critically
examine the smoky ceiling than we had hitherto been able to do -- when we rested our
glasses at arm's-length upon the table , and felt good , and thoughtful , and forgiving .
then harris , who was sitting next the window , drew aside the curtain and looked out upon

145
the street . it glistened darkly in the wet , the dim lamps flickered with each gust , the
rain splashed steadily into the puddles and trickled down the water-spouts into the
running gutters . a few soaked wayfarers hurried past , crouching beneath their dripping
umbrellas , the women holding up their skirts . well , said harris , reaching his hand out
for his glass , we have had a pleasant trip , and my hearty thanks for it to old father
thames -- but i think we did well to chuck it when we did . here's to three men well out
of a boat ! and montmorency , standing on his hind legs , before the window , peering out
into the night , gave a short bark of decided concurrence with the toast .





















146